

THE URGENCY OF CHANGE
By Jiddu Krishnamurti

《转变的紧迫性》
J.克里希那穆提

Sue 译

克里希那穆提中文论坛：http://www.jkrishnamurti.org.cn/
克里希那穆提教育论坛：http://www.j-krishnamurti.org.cn/
克里希那穆提视频地址：
优酷http://u.youku.com/Suesue0
土豆http://www.tudou.com/home/_55064397
克里希那穆提QQ群号码：
从已知中解脱群：40469755；克里希那穆提学校群：21807598
注：该书为非正式出版物。感觉多位帮我挑错的朋友。
看的时候，请顺便继续帮我挑挑错。
邮箱：suesue.wang@hotmail.com
 
Contents/目录

THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'AWARENESS' 《转变的紧迫性》之“觉察”	5
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'IS THERE A GOD?' 《转变的紧迫性》之“有神吗？”	18
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'FEAR' 《转变的紧迫性》之“恐惧”	25
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'HOW TO LIVE IN THIS WORLD' 《转变的紧迫性》之“怎样活在这个世界上”	35
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'RELATIONSHIP' 《转变的紧迫性》之“关系”	53
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'CONFLICT' 《转变的紧迫性》之“冲突”	66
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'THE RELIGIOUS LIFE' 《转变的紧迫性》之“宗教性的生活”	74
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'SEEING THE WHOLE' 《转变的紧迫性》之“看到整体”	82
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'MORALITY' 《转变的紧迫性》之“道德”	90
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'SUICIDE' 《转变的紧迫性》之“自杀”	94
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'DISCIPLINE' 《转变的紧迫性》之“纪律”	115
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'WHAT IS' 《转变的紧迫性》之“现在如何”	121
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'THE SEEKER' 《转变的紧迫性》之“追寻者”	127
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'ORGANISATION' 《转变的紧迫性》之“组织”	133
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'LOVE AND SEX' 《转变的紧迫性》之“爱与性”	139
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'PERCEPTION' 《转变的紧迫性》之“觉知”	146
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'SUFFERING' 《转变的紧迫性》之“苦难”	155
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'THE HEART AND THE MIND' 《转变的紧迫性》之“心灵与头脑”	160
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE 'BEAUTY AND THE ARTIST' 《转变的紧迫性》之“美与艺术家”	166
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'DEPENDENCE' 《转变的紧迫性》之“依赖”	173
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'BELIEF' 《转变的紧迫性》之“信仰”	182
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'DREAMS' 《转变的紧迫性》之“梦”	190
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'TRADITION' 《转变的紧迫性》之“传统”	200
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'CONDITIONING' 《转变的紧迫性》之“局限”	207
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'HAPPINESS' 《转变的紧迫性》之“幸福”	220
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'LEARNING' 《转变的紧迫性》之“学习”	228
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'SELF-EXPRESSION' 《转变的紧迫性》之“自我表达”	236
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'PASSION' 《转变的紧迫性》之“热情”	240
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'ORDER' 《转变的紧迫性》之“秩序”	245
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE COMMUNITY' 《转变的紧迫性》之“个人与团体”	250
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'MEDITATION AND ENERGY' 《转变的紧迫性》之“冥想与能量”	254
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'ENDING THOUGHT' 《转变的紧迫性》之“终结思想”	266
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'THE NEW HUMAN BEING' 《转变的紧迫性》之“新人类”	272


 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'AWARENESS'
《转变的紧迫性》之“觉察”

     Questioner: I should like to know what you mean by awareness because you have often said that awareness is really what your teaching is about. I've tried to understand it by listening to your talks and reading your books, but I don't seem to get very far. I know it is not a practice, and I understand why you so emphatically repudiate any kind of practice, drill, system, discipline or routine. I see the importance of that, for otherwise it becomes mechanical, and at the end of it the mind has become dull and stupid. I should like, if I may, to explore with you to the very end this question of what it means to be aware. You seem to give some extra, deeper meaning to this word, and yet it seems to me that we are aware of what's going on all the time. When I'm angry I know it, when I'm sad I know it and when I'm happy I know it. 

发问者：我想知道你说的觉察是什么意思，因为你经常说，觉察是你的教诲真正的核心。我曾尝试通过听你的演讲和读你的书，来理解这点，但是我似乎并没有走多远。我知道这不是一种练习，而且我也明白你为什么如此强调否定任何形式的练习、训练、体系、戒律以及例行程序。我看到了这一点的重要性，因为否则事情就会变得机械，最后心智就变得迟钝和愚蠢。如果可以的话，我想和你探讨一下，觉察到底意味着什么，并把这个问题深究到底。你似乎赋予了这个词某种特别的深刻的含义，但是对我来说，我们似乎一直都能觉察到发生着什么事情。我生气的时候我知道，伤心的时候我知道，开心的时候我也知道。

     Krishnamurti: I wonder if we really are aware of anger, sadness, happiness? Or are we aware of these things only when they are all over? Let us begin as though we know nothing about it at all and start from scratch. Let us not make any assertions, dogmatic or subtle, but let us explore this question which, if one really went into it very deeply, would reveal an extraordinary state that the mind had probably never touched, a dimension not touched by superficial awareness. Let us start from the superficial and work through. We see with our eyes, we perceive with our senses the things about us - the colour of the flower, the humming bird over the flower the light of this Californian sun, the thousand sounds of different qualities and subtleties, the depth and the height, the shadow of the tree and the tree itself. We feel in the same way our own bodies, which are the instruments of these different kinds of superficial, sensory perceptions. If these perceptions remained at the superficial level there would be no confusion at all. That flower, that pansy, that rose, are there, and that's all there is to it. There is no preference, no comparison, no like and dislike, only the thing before us without any psychological involvement. Is all this superficial sensory perception or awareness quite clear? It can be expanded to the stars, to the depth of the seas, and to the ultimate frontiers of scientific observation, using all the instruments of modern technology. 

克：我想知道，我们是否真的觉察到了愤怒、悲伤和快乐？还是我们在它们都结束了的时候才觉察到这些事情？让我们这样开始，就好像关于觉察我们一无所知，从头开始。我们不要做任何武断或者巧妙的断言，而是一起来探讨这个问题，如果你真的愿意非常深入地探索的话，那这个问题将揭示一种心智也许从未触及的非凡状态，一种肤浅的觉知从未触及的境界。我们先从浅层的觉知出发，一路走下去。我们用我们的眼睛看，我们用感官来感知我们周围的东西――花的颜色，花上飞着的蜂鸟，加州的阳光，有着不同质地和细微之处以及不同深度和高度的千万种天籁之音，树影以及树的本身。从我们自己的身体我们也能有相同的感觉，身体是这些不同的各种浅层感官觉知的工具。如果这些觉知保持在浅层，那么就完全不会产生困扰。那朵花，那朵紫罗兰，那朵玫瑰，就在那儿，对它们来说，仅此而已。没有偏好，没有比较，没有喜欢或不喜欢，只有我们面前的那样东西，而不涉及任何心理活动。所有这些浅层的感官觉知或者说觉察都清楚了吗？通过所有的现代科技仪器，这种觉知可以扩展到繁星，扩展到深海，扩展到科学观测的最前沿。

     Questioner: Yes, I think I understand that. 

发问者：是的，我想我明白这点。

     Krishnamurti: So you see that the rose and all the universe and the people in it, your own wife if you have one, the stars, the seas, the mountains, the microbes, the atoms, the neutrons, this room, the door, really are there. Now, the next step; what you think about these things, or what you feel about them, is your psychological response to them. And this we call thought or emotion. So the superficial awareness is a very simple matter: the door is there. But the description of the door is not the door, and when you get emotionally involved in the description you don't see the door. This description might be a word or a scientific treatise or a strong emotional response; none of these is the door itself. This is very important to understand right from the beginning. If we don't understand this we shall get more and more confused. The description is never the described. Though we are describing something even now, and we have to, the thing we are describing is not our description of it, so please bear this in mind right through our talk. Never confuse the word with the thing it describes. The word is never the real, and we are easily carried away when we come to the next stage of awareness where it becomes personal and we get emotional through the word.  

克：于是我们看到了那朵玫瑰，整个宇宙和其中的人们，你自己的妻子，如果你有的话，星星，大海，山脉，微生物，原子，中子，这间屋子，门，它们都真实地存在着。现在，开始下一步；你对这些东西有什么想法，或者对它们有什么感觉，这是你对它们的心理反应。而我们把这叫做思想或者感情。所以说，浅层的觉知是非常简单的事情：门在那儿。但是，对门的描述不是那门本身，当你将情感注入那描述时，你就看不到那门了。这描述可以是一句话，或者一篇科学论文，或者一种强烈的情感反应；这些都不是那门本身。从一开始就要清楚这点，这非常重要。如果我们不清楚这点，我们就会越来越困惑。描述从来都不是所描述之物。尽管我们现在也是在进行描述，我们不得不这么做，但是我们所描述的事情，并不是对它的描述，所以在我们的谈话中请务必把这一点牢记心中。永远不要把语言和语言所描述之物混为一谈。语言从来都不是那真实的东西本身，而我们却很容易被语言带走，尤其是当我们下一步要谈到觉察的时候，我们很容易把觉察变得个人化，透过这个词我们变得情绪化。

     So there is the superficial awareness of the tree, the bird, the door, and there is the response to that, which is thought, feeling, emotion. Now when we become aware of this response, we might call it a second depth of awareness. There is the awareness of the rose, and the awareness of the response to the rose. Often we are unaware of this response to the rose. In reality it is the same awareness which sees the rose and which sees the response. It is one movement and it is wrong to speak of the outer and inner awareness. When there is a visual awareness of the tree without any psychological involvement there is no division in relationship. But when there is a psychological response to the tree, the response is a conditioned response, it is the response of past memory, past experiences, and the response is a division in relationship. This response is the birth of what we shall call the "me" in relationship and the "non-me". This is how you place yourself in relationship to the world. This is how you create the individual and the community. The world is seen not as it is, but in its various relationships to the "me" of memory. This division is the life and the flourishing of everything we call our psychological being, and from this arises all contradiction and division. Are you very clear that you perceive this? When there is the awareness of the tree there is no evaluation. But when there is a response to the tree, when the tree is judged with like and dislike, then a division takes place in this awareness as the "me" and the "non-me", the "me" who is different from the thing observed. This "me" is the response, in relationship, of past memory, past experiences. Now can there be an awareness, an observation of the tree, without any judgement, and can there be an observation of the response, the reactions, without any judgement? In this way we eradicate the principle of division, the principle of "me" and "non-me", both in looking at the tree and in looking at ourselves. 

那么有了对树、鸟和门的浅层觉知，然后对它们产生反应，也就是思想、感觉和情感。现在，当我们觉察到这些反应，我们可以把它称为第二深度的觉察。有对那玫瑰的觉察，还觉察到对玫瑰的反应。我们经常觉察不到对玫瑰的反应。实际上看到反应的觉察和看到玫瑰的觉察是同一个觉察。这是同一个运动，觉察有内外之别的说法是错误的。当对树产生视觉感知而没有涉及心理活动时，这里的关系就没有分裂。但是当对树产生心理反应时，那反应就是局限的反应，那反应来源于过去的记忆、过去的经验，这反应就变成关系中的分裂。在这反应中，就诞生了我们关系中所谓的“我”和“非我”。你就是如此把自己置入与世界的关系中的。这就是你如何制造出了个体和团体。世界再也不是如实地被看到，而是，与记忆组成的“我”形成了各种关系，从这关系中去看这个世界。这种分裂，就变成了生活，滋养壮大了我们称为心理存在的各种事情，从这里就产生了所有的矛盾和分别。你很清楚你已经看到这点了吗？当对那棵树有觉察的时候，是没有评判的。但是如果对那棵树有了心理反应，当那棵树被判定为喜欢还是不喜欢，那么在这觉察中就发生了分裂，分成了“我”和“非我”，“我”不同于所观之物。这个“我”就是关系中来自过去的记忆和经验的反应。现在，能不能觉察、观察那棵树，而不带有任何评判？能不能不带有任何评判地观察那反应和回应？这样我们就消除了分裂的根源，“我”和“非我”的根源，观察那棵树的同时也观察我们自己。

     Questioner: I'm trying to follow you. Let's see if I have got it right. There is an awareness of the tree, that I understand. There is a psychological response to the tree, that I understand also. The psychological response is made up of past memories and past experiences, it is like and dislike, it is the division into the tree and the "me". Yes, I think I understand all that. 

发问者：我正努力跟上你。我们来看看我是不是理解对了。有对树的觉察，这点我理解。然后产生了对树的心理反应，这点我也理解。心理反应来源于过去的记忆和过去的经验，是喜欢和不喜欢，这就产生了树和“我”之间的分裂。是的，我想我都懂了。

     Krishnamurti: Is this as clear as the tree itself, or is it simply the clarity of description? Remember, as we have already said, the described is not the description. What have you got, the thing or its description? 

克：这点就像那树本身一样清楚呢，还是只是描述的很清楚？请记得，正如我们已经说过的，被描述之物并非描述。你明白的是什么，是事情本身还是对它的描述？

     Questioner: I think it is the thing. 

发问者：我想是事情本身。

     Krishnamurti: Therefore there is no "me" who is the description in the seeing of this fact. In the seeing of any fact there is no "me". There is either the "me" or the seeing, there can't be both. "Me" is non-seeing. The "me" cannot see, cannot be aware. 

克：那么就没有了那个看到这个事实并对它进行描述的“我”。看到任何事实时，都没有“我”。要么有“我”，要么有觉察，不可能两者同时都在。“我”就是无觉察。“我”无法看清，也无法觉察。

Questioner: May I stop here? I think I've got the feeling of it, but I must let it sink in. May I come again tomorrow? 

发问者：到这里我能停一下吗？我想我对此有所感觉，但是我必须完全领会吸收这一点。我可以明天再来吗？

     * * * 
     Questioner: I think I have really understood, non-verbally, what you said yesterday. There is the awareness of the tree, there is the conditioned response to the tree, and this conditioned response is conflict, it is the action of memory and past experiences, it is like and dislike, it is prejudice. I also understand that this response of prejudice is the birth of what we call the "me" or the censor. I see clearly that the "me", the "I", exists in all relationships. Now is there an "I" outside of relationships? 

发问者：我想我真的已经理解了，从非语言层面上理解了你昨天说的话。有对树的觉知，有对树的局限的反应，这局限的反应就是冲突，是出自过去的记忆和经验的行为，比如喜欢和不喜欢，这是偏见。我也明白了，这偏见的反应催生了我们所谓的“我”或者审查官。我清楚地看到，“我”，“自我”，存在于所有的关系中。那么，有没有一个“我”存在于关系之外？

     Krishnamurti: We have seen how heavily conditioned our responses are. When you ask if there is a "me" outside of relationship, it becomes a speculative question as long as there is no freedom from these conditioned responses. Do you see that? So our first question is not whether there is a "me" or not outside of conditioned responses, but rather, can the mind, in which is included all our feelings, be free of this conditioning, which is the past? The past is the "me". There is no "me" in the present. As long as the mind is operating in the past there is the "me", and the mind is this past, the mind is this "me". 

克：我们已经看清我们的反应是多么严重地受限了。当你问有没有一个“我”存在于关系之外，只要没办法从这些局限的反应中解脱，那么它就变成了一个思想性的问题。你看到这点了吗？所以我们首要的问题，不是有没有那样一个“我”，在局限的反应之外，而应该是，包含了我们所有感情的心智能否从这过去的局限中解脱出来？过去就是“我”。活在现在这一刻就不会有“我”的存在。只要心智还在过去中运作，就会有“我”，而心智就是这过去，心智就是这个“我”。

     You can't say there is the mind and there is the past, whether it is the past of a few days ago or of ten thousand years ago. So we are asking: can the mind free itself from yesterday? Now there are several things involved, aren't there? First of all there is a superficial awareness. Then there is the awareness of the conditioned response. Then there is the realization that the mind is the past, the mind is this conditioned response. Then there is the question whether this mind can free itself of the past. And all this is one unitary action of awareness because in this there are no conclusions. When we say the mind is the past, this realization is not a verbal conclusion but an actual perception of fact. The French have a word for such a perception of a fact, they call it "constatation". When we ask whether the mind can be free of the past is this question being asked by the censor, the "me", who is that very past? 

你不能说，心智是存在着的，过去是存在的着的，不管是几天前的过去，还是一万年前的过去。所以我们要问：心智能把自己从昨天解脱出来吗？现在这里涉及到几件事情，是不是？首先，有浅层的觉知。然后是对局限的反应的觉察。然后是意识到心智就是过去，心智就是这局限的反应。然后问题是，心智能否把自己从过去中解脱出来。这一切都是一个整体的觉察行动，因为其中没有结论。当我们说心智就是过去，这种认识不是一个文字结论，而是对事实真实的觉知。法语里有个词表达这样一种对事实的觉知，他们把它叫做“证实”。当我们问，心智能否从过去中解脱，那么这个问题是不是那个审查官，那个正是过去的“我”提出来的？

     Questioner: Can the mind be free of the past. 

发问者：心智能否从过去中解脱出来。

     Krishnamurti: Who is putting that question? Is it the entity who is the result of a great many conflicts, memories and experiences - is it he who is asking - or does this question arise of itself, out of the perception of the fact? If it is the observer who is putting the question, then he is trying to escape from the fact of himself, because, he says, I have lived so long in pain, in trouble, in sorrow, I should like to go beyond this constant struggle. If he asks the question from that motive his answer will be a taking refuge in some escape. One either turns away from a fact or one faces it. And the word and the symbol are a turning away from it. In fact, just to ask this question at all is already an act of escape, is it not? Let us be aware whether this question is or is not an act of escape. If it is, it is noise. If there is no observer, then there is silence, a complete negation of the whole past. 

克：是谁在问这个问题？是作为许多冲突、记忆和经验的结果的那个存在体――是他在问吗？还是这个问题是它自己从对过去的觉察中产生的？如果是那个观察者在提出这个问题，那么他只是在试图从自己的事实中逃脱，因为，他说，我已经在痛苦中，在困境中，在悲伤中生活了这么久，我想要超越这不停的挣扎。如果他是从这个动机问的这个问题，那么他的答案就会是在某种逃避中寻求庇护。他要么转身逃开事实，要么面对它。而语言和符号就是一种转身逃避。事实上，仅仅提出这个问题本身就已经是一种逃避行为了，不是吗？让我们来弄清楚这个问题是不是一种逃避行为。如果是逃避，那它就是一种噪音。如果没有观察者，那么就会有寂静，就会有对整个过去的全然否定。

     Questioner: Here I am lost. How can I wipe away the past in a few seconds?

发问者：在这里我迷失了。我要怎样在几秒钟内抹掉过去？

     Krishnamurti: Let us bear in mind that we are discussing awareness. We are talking over together this question of awareness. 
克：我们讨论的是觉察，让我们把这点记在心中。我们在一起讨论觉察这个问题。

     There is the tree, and the conditioned response to the tree, which is the "me" in relationship, the "me" who is the very centre of conflict. Now is it this "me" who is asking the question? - this "me" who, as we have said, is the very structure of the past? If the question is not asked from the structure of the past, if the question is not asked by the "me", then there is no structure of the past. When the structure is asking the question it is operating in relationship to the fact of itself, it is frightened of itself and it acts to escape from itself. When this structure does not ask the question, it is not acting in relationship to itself. To recapitulate: there is the tree, there is the word, the response to the tree, which is the censor, or the "me", which comes from the past; and then there is the question: can I escape from all this turmoil and agony? If the "me" is asking this question it is perpetuating itself. 

有树，以及对树局限的反应，也就是关系中的“我”，而“我”就是冲突的最核心。那么，是这个“我”在问这个问题吗？――我们说过，这个“我”就是过去构造出来的。如果这个问题不是从过去的构造中问出的，如果问题不是“我”问出的，那么就没有了过去的构造。当那构造在问出这个问题时，它就是在和它本身这个事实的关系中运作，它把自己吓坏了，想要采取行动逃开自己。当那构造不再问出这个问题时，它就没有在和自己的关系中运作。再重申一下：有树，有语言，有对树的反应，也就是来自于过去的审查官，或者“我”；然后就有了这个问题：我能从这一切混乱和痛苦中逃脱吗？如果是这个“我”在问这个问题，那它就是在无休止地延续自己。

     Now, being aware of that, it doesn't ask the question! Being aware and seeing all the implications of it, the question cannot be asked. It does not ask the question at all because it sees the trap. Now do you see that all this awareness is superficial? It is the same as the awareness which sees the tree. 

现在，觉察到这点，它就不会再问那个问题了！觉察，看到其中的所有涵义，就不会再问这个问题了。它根本不会问这个问题，因为它看到了其中的陷阱。现在你是不是看到了所有这些觉察都是浅层的？它就和看到树的觉察是一样的。

     Questioner: Is there any other kind of awareness? Is there any other dimension to awareness? 
发问者：有没有其他类型的觉察？觉察有没有其他的境界？

     Krishnamurti: Again let's be careful, let's be very clear that we are not asking this question with any motive. If there is a motive we are back in the trap of conditioned response. When the observer is wholly silent, not made silent, there is surely a different quality of awareness coming into being. 

克：我们又得小心点，我们得非常清楚我们并不是出于任何动机来问这个问题。如果有动机，我们就又落入局限的反应这个陷阱里去了。当观察者完全安静的时候，不是制造出的安静，那就必然会有一种不同品质的觉察产生。

     Questioner: What action could there possibly be in any circumstances without the observer - what question or what action? 

发问者：没有观察者的情况下，会有怎样的行动产生――怎样的问题或者行动？

     Krishnamurti: Again, are you asking this question from this side of the river, or is it from the other bank? If you are on the other bank, you will not ask this question; if you are on that bank, your action will be from that bank. So there is an awareness of this bank, with all its structure, its nature and all its traps, and to try to escape from the trap is to fall into another trap. And what deadly monotony there is in all that! Awareness has shown us the nature of the trap, and therefore there is the negation of all traps; so the mind is now empty. It is empty of the "me" and of the trap. This mind has a different quality, a different dimension of awareness. This awareness is not aware that it is aware. 

克：再问你一次，你是从河的此岸问出这个问题，还是从彼岸问的？如果你在彼岸，你不会问这个问题；如果你在彼岸，你就会从彼岸行动。所以对此岸有一种觉察，连同此岸的一切结构，它的本质，它所有的陷阱，而试图逃离陷阱就会落入另一个陷阱。这一切都是多么致命地无聊乏味啊！觉察已经展示给我们那陷阱的本质，进而把所有陷阱都否定掉；所以心智现在是清空的。清掉了“我”和那陷阱。这心智就具有了一种不同的品质，一种不同境界的觉察。这种觉察并不知道它在觉察。

     Questioner: My God, this is too difficult. You are saying things that seem true, that sound true, but I'm not there yet. Can you put it differently? Can you push me out of my trap? 

发问者：我的天，这太难了。你说的话似乎是真的，听起来是真的，但是我还没到那里。你能换个说法吗？你能把我从我的陷阱里拉出来吗？

     Krishnamurti: Nobody can push you out of your trap - no guru, no drug, no mantra, nobody, including myself - nobody, especially myself. All that you have to do is to be aware from the beginning to the end, not become inattentive in the middle of it. This new quality of awareness is attention, and in this attention there is no frontier made by the "me". This attention is the highest form of virtue, therefore it is love. It is supreme intelligence, and there cannot be attention if you are not sensitive to the structure and the nature of these man-made traps.

克：没人能把你从你的陷阱里拉出来――没有上师，没有药物，没有曼陀罗，没人，包括我自己――没人，特别是我自己。所有你能做的就是从始至终都在觉察，不在中途变得漫不经心。这种崭新品质的觉察就是全神贯注，在这全神贯注中，没有“我”制造的疆域。这种全神贯注是最高形式的美德，所以就是爱。它是至高无上的智慧，如果你对这些人造陷阱的结构和本质不敏感的话，全神贯注就不可能出现。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'IS THERE A GOD?'
《转变的紧迫性》之“有神吗？”

Questioner: I really would like to know if there is a god. If there isn't life has no meaning. Not knowing god, man has invented him in a thousand beliefs and images. The division and the fear bred by all these beliefs have divided him from his fellow men. To escape the pain and the mischief of this division he creates yet more beliefs, and the mounting misery and confusion have engulfed him. Not knowing, we believe. Can I know god? I've asked this question of many saints both in India and here and they've all emphasized belief. "Believe and then you will know; without belief you can never know." What do you think?

发问者：我真的想知道是不是有神。如果没有，那生命就没有意义。因为不知道神，人类就发明了关于神的千万种信仰和形象。所有这些信仰滋生的分别和恐惧，把他和他的伙伴们分离了。为逃避这种分离的痛苦和不幸，他就制造了更多的信仰，而不断增加的苦难和困惑把他吞没了。因为不了解，所以我们才会相信。我们能知道神吗？这个问题我曾经问过很多圣人，印度的和这儿的，他们都强调信仰。“相信，然后你就会知道；没有信仰，你永远不会知道。”你怎么看？

Krishnamurti: Is belief necessary to find out? To learn is far more important than to know. Learning about belief is the end of belief. When the mind is free of belief then it can look. It is belief, or disbelief, that binds; for disbelief and belief are the same: they are the opposite sides of the same coin. So we can completely put aside positive or negative belief; the believer and the non-believer are the same. When this actually takes place then the question, "Is there a god?" has quite a different meaning. The word god with all its tradition, its memory, its intellectual and sentimental connotations - all this is not god. The word is not the real. So can the mind be free of the word?

克：是不是需要去发现信仰是什么？了解要远比知道重要。对信仰的了解就是信仰的终结。当心智从信仰中解脱出来，它就能观察了。互相纠结的，是信仰，或者不信仰；因为不信仰和信仰是一回事：它们都是同一个硬币的正反两面。所以我们可以把肯定或否定的信仰完全放在一边；信仰者与不信仰者都是一样的。如果真的做到了这点，那么“有神吗？”这个问题就有了完全不同的意义。神这个词，连同这个词所包含的所有传统，记忆，以及智识上的和感情上的内涵――这一切都不是神。词语并非真实之物。那么心智能摆脱这个词吗？

Questioner: I don't know what that means. 
发问者：我不知道那句话是什么意思。

Krishnamurti: The word is the tradition, the hope, the desire to find the absolute, the striving after the ultimate, the movement which gives vitality to existence. So the word itself becomes the ultimate, yet we can see that the word is not the thing. The mind is the word, and the word is thought.

克：那个词是想要找到那绝对真理的传统、希冀和渴望，是对那终极之物的追求，是赋予其自身存在以生命力的一种活动。所以那个词本身变成了那终极之物，但是你能看出那个词并非所指之物。心智就是那个词，而那个词就是思想。

Questioner: And you're asking me to strip myself of the word? How can I do that? The word is the past; it is memory. The wife is the word, and the house is the word. In the beginning was the word. Also the word is the means of communication, identification. Your name is not you, and yet without your name I can't ask about you. And you're asking me if the mind can be free of the word - that is, can the mind be free of its own activity?

发问者：而你是在让我自己把那个词摆脱掉？我怎么才能做到这点？词语是过去；是记忆。妻子是个词，房子是个词。开始的时候只是个词而已。而且词语也是沟通、确认的方式。你的名字不是你，但是如果没有你的名字，我就不能问起你。你在问我，心智能否摆脱词语――也就是，心智能否摆脱它自身的行为？

Krishnamurti: In the case of the tree the object is before our eyes, and the word refers to the tree by universal agreement. Now with the word god there is nothing to which it refers, so each man can create his own image of that for which there is no reference. The theologian does it in one way, the intellectual in another, and the believer and the non-believer in their own different ways. Hope generates this belief, and then seeking. This hope is the outcome of despair - the despair of all we see around us in the world. From despair hope is born, they also are two sides of the same coin. When there is no hope there is hell, and this fear of hell gives us the vitality of hope. Then illusion begins. So the word has led us to illusion and not to god at all. God is the illusion which we worship; and the non-believer creates the illusion of another god which he worships - the State, or some utopia, or some book which he thinks contains all truth. So we are asking you whether you can be free of the word with its illusion. 

克：拿我们眼前的树这个物体来举个例子，全世界公认“树”这个词指的就是树。而用神这个词，它所指的东西空无一物，所以每个人就对这个无所依据的东西创造出他自己的形象来。神学家用一种方式创造出形象，知识分子用另一种方式，信仰者和不信仰者用他们各自不同的方式。希望催生了这些信仰，然后就开始追寻。这希望是绝望的结果――这种绝望我们在世界上在我们周围都能看见。从绝望中诞生了希望，它们也是同一个硬币的两面。如果没有希望就是地狱，这种对地狱的恐惧就给我们的希望赋予了生命力。然后幻想就开始了。所以语言将我们导向幻象，而根本不是引向神。神是我们崇拜的幻象；而不信仰者创造出别的神的幻象来崇拜――国家，或者某种乌托邦，或者他们认为包含着所有真理的某本书。所以我们在问，你能否从词语及其幻象中解脱出来。

Questioner: I must meditate on this.
发问者：我必须得好好想想这点。

Krishnamurti: If there is no illusion, what is left?
克：如果没有幻象，那剩下的是什么？

Questioner: Only what is.
发问者：只有实际状况。

Krishnamurti: The "what is" is the most holy.
克：“实际状况”才是最神圣的。

Questioner: If the "what is" is the most holy then war is most holy, and hatred, disorder, pain, avarice and plunder. Then we must not speak of any change at all. If "what is" is sacred, then every murderer and plunderer and exploiter can say, "Don't touch me, what I'm doing is sacred".

发问者：如果“实际状况”是最神圣的，那么战争就是最神圣的，还有仇恨，失序，痛苦，贪婪和掠夺。那么我们就根本不能谈论任何改变了。如果“实际状况”是神圣的，那么每个杀人犯和掠夺者以及剥削者都会说，“别碰我，我做的事情是神圣的。”

Krishnamurti: The very simplicity of that statement, " `what is' is the most sacred", leads to great misunderstanding, because we don't see the truth of it. If you see that what is is sacred, you do not murder, you do not make war, you do not hope, you do not exploit. Having done these things you cannot claim immunity from a truth which you have violated. The white man who says to the black rioter, "What is is sacred, do not interfere, do not burn", has not seen, for if he had, the Negro would be sacred to him, and there would be no need to burn. So if each one of us sees this truth there must be change. This seeing of the truth is change.

克：正是简简单单的那句话，“‘实际状况’是最神圣的”，导致了巨大的误解，因为我们没有看到它揭示的真相。如果你明白实际状况是神圣的，那么你就不会谋杀，你就不会发动战争，你就不会希望，你就不会剥削。要是做了这些事情，你就不能声称对你所违背的真理享有豁免权。如果白人对黑人暴动者说，“实际状况是神圣的，不要干涉，不要焚烧”，那他就没有看到这一点，因为如果他明白这点，那么对他来说，黑人就是神圣不可侵犯的，那么就没必要去焚烧了。所以，如果我们每个人都看到了这个真相，就必然会有改变。看到这个真相本身，就是改变。

Questioner: I came here to find out if there is god, and you have completely confused me.
发问者：我来这是为了弄清是不是有神，而你把我完全弄糊涂了。

Krishnamurti: You came to ask if there is god. We said: the word leads to illusion which we worship, and for this illusion we destroy each other willingly. When there is no illusion the "what is" is most sacred. Now let's look at what actually is. At a given moment the "what is" may be fear, or utter despair, or a fleeting joy. These things are constantly changing. And also there is the observer who says, "These things all change around me, but I remain permanent". Is that a fact, is that what really is? Is he not also changing, adding to and taking away from himself, modifying, adjusting himself, becoming or not becoming? So both the observer and the observed are constantly changing. What is is change. That is a fact. That is what is.

克：你来这问是否有神。我们说：词语导致我们崇拜幻象，为了这个幻象我们愿意摧毁彼此。如果没有幻象，“实际状况”就是最神圣的。现在让我们来看看实际状况究竟如何。在某个特定的时刻，“实际状况”也许是恐惧，或者完全的绝望，或者飞逝的快乐。这些东西在不停地变化。同时又有个观察者说，“我周围的这些东西都在变，而我保持恒定”。这是事实吗，这是实际的状况吗？在他自己之上加加减减，修修补补，调整自己，想变成或者不变成，他不是也在变吗？所以观察者和被观察者都在不停地变化。实际状况就是变化。这是个事实。这就是实际状况。

Questioner: Then is love changeable? If everything is a movement of change, isn't love also part of that movement? And if love is changeable, then I can love one woman today and sleep with another tomorrow.

发问者：那么爱是可变的吗？如果所有东西都是变化的运动，难道爱不也是那变动的一部分吗？如果爱是可变的，那么我就能今天爱上一个女人，明天又和另一个女人上床。

Krishnamurti: Is that love? Or are you saying that love is different from its expression? Or are you giving to expression greater importance than to love, and therefore making a contradiction and a conflict. Can love ever be caught in the wheel of change? If so then it can also be hate; then love is hate. It is only when there is no illusion that "what is" is most sacred. When there is no illusion "what is" is god or any other name that can be used. So god, or whatever name you give it, is when you are not. When you are, it is not. When you are not, love is. When you are, love is not.

克：那是爱吗？还是你是说，爱与它的表现是不同的？还是你在赋予表现形式比赋予爱更大的重要性？因而就制造了矛盾和冲突。爱能被困在改变的车轮里吗？如果是如此，那么它就也能变成恨；那么爱就是恨了。只有没有幻象了，“实际状况”才是最神圣的。如果没有幻象，“实际状况”就是神或者你能使用的任何其他名字。所以，神，或者不管你管它叫什么名字，只有当你不在的时候，才存在。如果有你，它就不在。没有了你，就有了爱。有你，就没有爱。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'FEAR'
《转变的紧迫性》之“恐惧”

     Questioner: I used to take drugs but now I am free of them. Why am I so frightened of everything? I wake up in the mornings paralysed with fear. I can hardly move out of bed. I'm frightened of going outside, and I'm frightened of being inside. Suddenly as I drive along this fear comes upon me, and I spend a whole day sweating, nervous, apprehensive, and at the end of the day I'm completely exhausted. Sometimes, though very rarely, in the company of a few intimate friends or at the house of my parents, I lose this fear; I feel quiet, happy, completely relaxed. As I came along in my car today, I was frightened of coming to see you, but as I came up the drive and walked to the door I suddenly lost this fear, and now as I sit here in this nice quiet room I feel so happy that I wonder what I was ever frightened about. Now I have no fear. I can smile and truthfully say: I'm very glad to see you! But I can't stay here for ever, and I know that when I leave here the cloud of fear will engulf me again. That is what I'm faced with. I've been to ever so many psychiatrists and analysts, here and abroad, but they merely delve into my memories of childhood - and I'm fed up with it because the fear hasn't gone at all. 

发问者：我曾经嗑药，但是现在我摆脱了它们。为什么我对所有事情都是那么恐惧？早上醒来的时候，我恐惧得动弹不得。我几乎下不了床。我害怕出去，也害怕待在屋里。在我开车的时候，这种恐惧会突然袭来，然后我一整天都冒汗，紧张，害怕，在一天结束的时候，我精疲力竭。有时候，尽管很少，在几个密友的陪伴下，或者在我父母的家里，我没有这种恐惧；我感觉安宁，快乐，完全放松。在我今天驾车开往这里的路上，我害怕来见你，但是当我来到这条大道走到门口的时候，我突然不恐惧了，当我现在坐在这个漂亮安静的屋子里的时候，我觉得太开心了，以致于我不知道我究竟怕什么。现在我没有恐惧。我能微笑，真心地说：见到你非常高兴！但是我不能永远都待在这儿，我知道当我离开的时候，恐惧的乌云会再次吞噬我。这就是我正面对的。我见过太多的精神科医生和分析师，这儿的和国外的，但是他们仅仅是一头扎入我童年的记忆――而我受够了这些，因为恐惧根本就没有消失。

     Krishnamurti: Let's forget childhood memories and all that nonsense, and come to the present. Here you are, and you say you are not frightened now; you're happy for the moment and can hardly imagine the fear you were in. Why have you no fear now? Is it the quiet, clear, well-proportioned room, furnished with good taste, and this sense of welcoming warmth which you feel? Is that why you are not frightened now? 

克：让我们忘了儿时记忆和所有那些无稽之谈，来到现在吧。你在这儿，你说现在不害怕；这会儿你很开心，几乎想象不出你曾身处其中的恐惧。你现在为什么没有恐惧？是不是因为这间安静的，整洁的，比例匀称的，装饰得很有品位的屋子，以及你感受到的这种怡人的温暖感觉？是这些让你现在不害怕吗？

     Questioner: That's part of it. Also perhaps it is you. I heard you talk in Switzerland, and I've heard you here, and I feel a kind of deep friendship for you. But I don't want to depend on nice houses, welcoming atmospheres and good friends in order not to be afraid. When I go to my parents I have this same feeling of warmth. But it is deadly at home; all families are deadly with their little enclosed activities, their quarrels, and the vulgarity of all that loud talk about nothing, and their hypocrisy. I'm fed up with it all. And yet, when I go to them and there is this certain warmth, I do feel, for a while, free of this fear. The psychiatrists can't tell me what my fear is about. They call it a "floating fear". It's a black, bottomless, ghastly pit. I've spent a great deal of money and time on being analysed and it really hasn't helped at all. So what am I to do? 

发问者：这是一部分原因吧。也可能是因为你。我听过你在瑞士的讲话，也听过你在这里的讲话，我感到对你有一种深深的友爱。但是我不想依靠漂亮的房子，怡人的气氛和好朋友才能不害怕。当我去我父母那儿时，我同样感觉到温暖。但是回家就很恐怖；所有家庭都很恐怖，因为它们琐碎而封闭的活动，它们的争吵，因为微不足道的事情而引发的所有那些粗俗的大声喧哗，以及它们的虚伪。我受够了这一切。但是，当我去见他们的时候，有这么一种温暖感，我确实能感觉到，有那么一会我从这恐惧中解脱了。精神科医生无法告诉我我因为什么而恐惧。他们管它叫做“浮动恐惧”。这是个黑黑的，无底的，可怕的陷阱。我花了大量的金钱和时间做分析，但是并没有任何帮助。那我该怎么办？

     Krishnamurti: Is it that being sensitive you need a certain shelter, a certain security, and not being able to find it, you are frightened of the ugly world? Are you sensitive? 

克：是不是因为你太敏感所以需要某种庇护，某种安全感，但是遍寻不获，所以就对这个丑陋的世界满怀恐惧？你敏感吗？

     Questioner: Yes, I think so. Perhaps not in the way you mean, but I am sensitive. I don't like the noise, the bustle, the vulgarity of this modern existence and the way they throw sex at you everywhere you go today, and the whole business of fighting your way to some beastly little position. I am really frightened of all this - not that I can't fight and get a position for myself, but it makes me sick with fear. 

发问者：是的，我想是的。也许不是你说的那个意思，但我是敏感的。我不喜欢噪音，喧闹，不喜欢这个现代世界的粗俗，现在不管你去哪儿到处都会碰到性，还有苦苦争斗只是为了得到某个极其卑微的职位，我不喜欢这整件事情。我真的害怕这一切――不是因为我自己不能奋斗无法为自己谋得一个职位，而是这让我恐惧而厌恶。

Krishnamurti: Most people who are sensitive need a quiet shelter and a warm friendly atmosphere. Either they create it for themselves or depend on others who can give it to them - the family, the wife, the husband, the friend. Have you got such a friend? 

克：敏感的人大多都需要一个安静的庇护和一种温暖友好的气氛。不管他们是为自己创造这些出来，还是依靠别人给他们――家庭，妻子，丈夫，朋友。你有这样一个朋友吗？

     Questioner: No. I'm frightened of having such a friend. I'm frightened of being dependent on him. 

发问者：没有。我害怕有这样一个朋友。我害怕依赖他。

     Krishnamurti: So there is this issue: being sensitive, demanding a certain shelter, and depending on others to give you that shelter. There is sensitivity, and dependence; the two often go together. And to depend on another is to fear losing him. So you depend more and more, and then the fear increases in proportion to your dependence. It is a vicious circle. Have you enquired why you depend? We depend on the postman, on physical comfort and so on; that's quite simple. We depend on people and things for our physical well-being and survival; it is quite natural and normal. We have to depend on what we may call the organizational side of society. But we also depend psychologically, and this dependence, though comforting, breeds fear. Why do we depend psychologically? 

克：那么就有这个问题：敏感，需要某种庇护，依赖别人给你那种庇护。有敏感，有依赖；这两者通常是如影随形的。而依靠别人就害怕会失去他。所以你就越来越依赖，然后恐惧随着你的依赖而增强。这是个恶性循环。你是否探询过你为什么依赖？我们依赖邮差，依赖身体上的舒适，等等；这非常简单。我们因为身体上的安康和生存而依赖人们和东西；这很自然，很正常。我们还依赖社会上我们称为组织的那一面。但是我们在心理上也依赖，这种依赖，虽然令人很欣慰，但是滋生了恐惧。我们为什么在心理上会依赖？

     Questioner: You're talking to me about dependence now, but I came here to discuss fear. 

发问者：你现在跟我讨论依赖，可我来这儿是为了探讨恐惧的。

     Krishnamurti: Let's examine them both because they are interrelated as we shall see. Do you mind if we discuss them both? We were talking about dependence. What is dependence? Why does one psychologically depend on another? Isn't dependence the denial of freedom? Take away the house, the husband, the children, the possessions - what is a man if all these are removed? In himself he is insufficient, empty, lost. So out of this emptiness, of which he is afraid, he depends on property, on people and beliefs. You may be so sure of all the things you depend on that you can't imagine ever losing them - the love of your family, and the comfort. Yet fear continues. So we must be clear that any form of psychological dependence must inevitably breed fear, though the things you depend on may seem almost indestructible. Fear arises out of this inner insufficiency, poverty and emptiness. So now, do you see, we have three issues - sensitivity, dependence and fear? The three are interrelated. Take sensitivity: the more sensitive you are (unless you understand how to remain sensitive without dependence, how to be vulnerable without agony), the more you depend. Then take dependence: the more you depend, the more there is disgust and the demand to be free. This demand for freedom encourages fear, for this demand is a reaction, not freedom from dependence. 

克：让我们来一起检视，因为它们两个是互相关联的，我们将会看到这点。你介不介意我们把两个问题一同探讨？我们在讨论依赖。什么是依赖？一个人为什么在心理上会依赖另一个人？难道依赖不是否定了自由吗？把房子，丈夫，孩子，拥有的东西都拿走――如果这一切都拿走了，那一个人是什么？他自身无法自足，空虚，迷失。那么，他害怕这种空虚，因为这种空虚，他依赖财产，依赖人们和信仰。你也许对所有这些你依赖的东西太确信了，你从来无法想象失去它们――你家庭的爱，和舒适。但是，恐惧持续着。所以我们必须清楚任何形式的心理依赖必然会滋生恐惧，尽管你依赖的东西可能看起来几乎坚不可摧。恐惧来源于这种内在的不足，贫乏和空虚。那么现在，你是否看到，我们有三件事情――敏感，依赖和恐惧？这三者是互相关联的。拿敏感来说：你越敏感（除非你了解如何不依赖就能保持敏感，如何不痛苦就能保持敏感），你就越依赖。然后再说依赖：你越依赖，反感就越严重，就越想要自由。这种对自由的渴望会增强恐惧，因为这种渴望是一种反应，而不是从依赖中解脱。

     Questioner: Are you dependent on anything? 

发问者：你依赖任何东西吗？

     Krishnamurti: Of course I'm dependent physically on food, clothes and shelter, but psychologically, inwardly, I'm not dependent on anything - not on gods, not on social morality, not on belief, not on people. But it is irrelevant whether or not I am dependent. So, to continue: fear is the awareness of our inner emptiness, loneliness and poverty, and of not being able to do anything about it. We are concerned only with this fear which breeds dependence, and which is again increased by dependence. If we understand fear we also understand dependence. So to understand fear there must be sensitivity to discover, to understand how it comes into being. If one is at all sensitive one becomes conscious of one's own extraordinary emptiness - a bottomless pit which cannot be filled by the vulgar entertainment of drugs nor by the entertainment of the churches, nor the amusements of society: nothing can ever fill it. Knowing this the fear increases. This drives you to depend, and this dependence makes you more and more insensitive. And knowing this is so, you are frightened of it. So our question now is: how is one to go beyond this emptiness, this loneliness - not how is one to be self-sufficient, not how is one to camouflage this emptiness permanently? 

克：当然身体上我依赖食物，衣服和住所，但是心理上，内在地，我不依赖任何东西――不依赖神，不依赖社会道德，不依赖信仰，不依赖人们。但是我是不是依赖，这不重要。那我们继续：恐惧是知道我们内在的空虚，孤独和贫乏，对此我们无能为力。我们只关心滋生依赖的这种恐惧，这种恐惧又随着依赖增强。如果我们懂得了恐惧，我们就也能懂得依赖。而要懂得恐惧，就必须敏感地去发现，去了解它是怎么形成的。如果一个人真的敏感，他就能发觉自己那巨大的空虚――一个无底洞，无法用粗俗的药物消遣填满，也无法用教会的娱乐或者社会的消遣满足：没东西能填满它。知道这一点，恐惧就增强了。这驱使你去依赖，这种依赖让你越来越敏感。知道这些就是现实，你会害怕。所以现在我们的问题是：一个人要怎样超越这种空虚，这种孤独？――不是一个人要如何变得自满，不是一个人要如何永远地掩饰这种空虚。

     Questioner: Why do you say it is not a question of becoming self-sufficient? 

发问者：你为什么说这不是一个如何变得自满的问题？

     Krishnamurti: Because if you are self-sufficient you are no longer sensitive; you become smug and callous, indifferent and enclosed. To be without dependence, to go beyond dependence, doesn't mean to become self-sufficient. Can the mind face and live with this emptiness, and not escape in any direction? 

克：因为如果你自满就不会再敏感了；你变得沾沾自喜而麻木，冷漠而封闭。没有依赖，超越依赖，并不意味着变得自满。心智能不能面对并与这种空虚共处，而不向任何方向逃避？

     Questioner: It would drive me mad to think I had to live with it for ever. 
发问者：想想我得永远与它共处，会让我发疯的。

     Krishnamurti: Any movement away from this emptiness is an escape. And this flight away from something, away from "what is," is fear. Fear is flight away from something. What is is not the fear; it is the flight which is the fear, and this will drive you mad, not the emptiness itself. So what is this emptiness, this loneliness? How does it come about? Surely it comes through comparison and measurement, doesn't it? I compare myself with the saint, the master, the great musician, the man who knows, the man who has arrived. In this comparison I find myself wanting and insufficient: I have no talent, I am inferior, I have not "realised; I am not, and that man is. So out of measurement and comparison comes the enormous cavity of emptiness and nothingness. And the flight from this cavity is fear. And the fear stops us from understanding this bottomless pit. It is a neurosis which feeds upon itself. And again, this measurement, this comparison, is the very essence of dependence. So we are back again at dependence, a vicious circle. 

克：任何离开这种空虚的行为都是一种逃避。这种从某事中逃离，从“实际状况”中逃离的行为，是恐惧。恐惧是逃离某事。实际状况不是恐惧；逃离才是恐惧，这会让你发疯，而不是空虚本身。所以，这种空虚，这种孤独是什么？它是怎么产生的？显然，它来自比较和衡量，不是吗？我拿自己和圣人，和大师，和伟大的音乐家比较，和知道的人，和达成了的人比较。在这种比较中，我发现自己想要得到，我不满足：我没有天分，我差劲，我没有“实现”；我不是，而那个人是。那么从衡量和比较，就产生了空虚和一无是处的巨大空洞。从这空洞逃离，就是恐惧。而恐惧阻止了我们对这无底洞的了解。这是一种自给自足的神经官能症。而这种衡量，这种比较，再次成为依赖的核心。所以我们又回到了依赖，一个恶性循环。

     Questioner: We have come a long way in this discussion and things are clearer. There is dependence; is it possible not to depend? Yes, I think it is possible. Then we have the fear; is it possible not to run away from emptiness at all, which means, not to escape through fear? Yes, I think it is possible. That means we are left with the emptiness. Is it possible then to face this emptiness since we have stopped running away from it through fear? Yes, I think it is possible. Is it possible finally, not to measure, not to compare? For if we have come this far, and I think we have, only this emptiness remains, and one sees that this emptiness is the outcome of comparison. And one sees that dependence and fear are the outcome of this emptiness. So there is comparison, emptiness, fear, dependence. Can I really live a life without comparison, without measurement? 

发问者：通过这次讨论我们已经走了很远，事情也清晰些了。有依赖的问题；可能不依赖吗？是的，我想是可能的。然后我们讨论了恐惧；到底有没有可能完全不从空虚中逃离，也就是，不通过恐惧来逃避？是的，我想是可能的。那就意味着我们就剩空虚了。那么是不是有可能面对这空虚？因为我们已经不再通过恐惧逃离这空虚了。是的，我想是可能的。那么最后，是不是有可能不衡量，不比较？因为如果我们走到这一步了，我想我们确实到了，那就只剩这空虚了，而且也看到了这空虚是比较的结果。也看到了依赖和恐惧是这空虚的结果。所以谈到的有比较，空虚，恐惧，和依赖。我能过一种没有比较，没有衡量的生活吗？

     Krishnamurti: Of course you have to measure to put a carpet on the floor! 
克：当然你得衡量才能把地毯铺在地板上！

     Questioner: Yes. I mean can I live without psychological comparison? 
发问者：是的。我是说我能在心理上不比较地生活吗？

     Krishnamurti: Do you know what it means to live without psychological comparison when all your life you have been conditioned to compare - at school, at games, at the university and in the office? Everything is comparison. To live without comparison! Do you know what it means? It means no dependence, no self-sufficiency, no seeking, no asking; therefore it means to love. Love has no comparison, and so love has no fear. Love is not aware of itself as love, for the word is not the thing.

克：当你的整个生命――在学校里，在游戏中，在大学里，在办公室里都被局限于比较，那你知道心理上不比较地生活是什么意思吗？每件事情都比较。不比较地生活！你知道那意味着什么吗？那意味着没有依赖，没有自满，没有追寻，没有要求；因而那就意味着爱。爱没有比较，所以爱没有恐惧。爱不知道自己是爱，因为词语并非所指之物。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'HOW TO LIVE IN THIS WORLD'
《转变的紧迫性》之“怎样活在这个世界上”

     Questioner: Please, sir, could you tell me how I am to live in this world? I don't want to be part of it yet I have to live in it, I have to have a house and earn my own living. And my neighbours are of this world; my children play with theirs, and so one becomes a part of this ugly mess, whether one wants to or not. I want to find out how to live in this world without escaping from it, without going into a monastery or around the world in a sailing boat. I want to educate my children differently, but first I want to know how to live surrounded by so much violence, greed, hypocrisy, competition and brutality. 

发问者：请问，先生，你能否告诉我该怎样活在这个世界上？我不想成为它的一部分，但是我还得生活在其中，我得有栋房子，养活我自己。而我的邻居是这个世界的一部分；我的孩子和他们的孩子一起玩，这样一个人就变成了这个乱糟糟丑陋世界的一部分，不管他想不想如此。我想发现如何生活在这个世界上，不从中逃避，不躲到寺院里去，也不坐一艘帆船去环游世界。我想以不同的方式来教育孩子，但是首先我想知道，在如此之多的暴力、贪婪、虚伪、竞争和残酷的包围之中，要如何生活。

     Krishnamurti: Don't let's make a problem of it. When anything becomes a problem we are caught in the solution of it, and then the problem becomes a cage, a barrier to further exploration and understanding. So don't let us reduce all life to a vast and complex problem. If the question is put in order to overcome the society in which we live, or to find a substitute for that society, or to try to escape from it though living in it, it must inevitably lead to a contradictory and hypocritical life. This question also implies, doesn't it, the complete denial of ideology? If you are really enquiring you cannot start with a conclusion, and all ideologies are a conclusion. So we must begin by finding out what you mean by living. 

克：让我们不要把它变成一个问题。如果任何事情变成了问题，我们就困在对它的解决之道中了，那个问题就会变成一个牢笼，变成了对更深入的探索和了解的一个障碍。所以让我们不要把所有生活降减为一个复杂庞大的问题。如果提出问题是为了战胜我们生活于其中的社会，或者为了找到这个社会的某种替代品，或者尽管生活于其中却试图从中逃避，那它就不可避免地会导致一种矛盾的虚伪的生活。这个问题也意味着，对思想观念的完全否定，难道不是吗？如果你真的在探询，那么你就不能从一个结论开始，所有的思想观念都是一种结论。所以我们必须从发现你所说的活着意味着什么开始。

     Questioner: Please, sir, let's go step by step. 
发问者：先生，请让我们一步步来。

     Krishnamurti: I am very glad that we can go into this step by step, patiently, with an enquiring mind and heart. Now what do you mean by living? 

克：我很高兴我们能一步步耐心地深入这个问题，用一颗探询的头脑和心灵。那么你说的活着是什么意思？

     Questioner: I've never tried to put it into words. I'm bewildered, I don't know what to do, how to live. I've lost faith in everything - religions, philosophies and political utopias. There is war between individuals and between nations. In this permissive society everything is allowed - killing, riots, the cynical oppression of one country by another, and nobody does anything about it because interference might mean world war. I am faced with all this and I don't know what to do; I don't know how to live at all. I don't want to live in the midst of such confusion. 

发问者：我从未试过要把它付诸语言。我很迷惑，我不知道该怎么办，怎么生活。我对所有事情都失去了信心――宗教，哲学和政治乌托邦。个人之间和国家之间都有战争。在这个悲观的社会里，所有事情都是允许的――杀戮，暴乱，一个国家被另一个国家毫不留情地压迫着，没有人对此做点什么，因为干涉也许就意味着世界大战。我不想生活在如此的困惑当中。

     Krishnamurti: What is it you are asking for - a different life, or for a new life which comes about with the understanding of the old life? If you want to live a different life without understanding what has brought about this confusion, you will always be in contradiction, in conflict, in confusion. And that of course is not a new life at all. So are you asking for a new life or for a modified continuity of the old one, or to understand the old one? 

克：你想要的是什么――一种不同以往的生活，还是伴随着对以往生活的了解而来的一种全新生活？如果你想未经了解以往就过上一种不同的生活，它已经带来了这些困惑，那么你将始终处于矛盾中，冲突中，困惑中。当然那根本不是一种新生活。所以，你是想要一种新生活呢，还是想要以往生活经过改良后的某种延续，还是去了解以前的生活方式？

     Questioner: I'm not at all sure what I want but I am beginning to see what I don't want. 
发问者：我不确定我想要什么，但是我开始看到我不想要什么。

     Krishnamurti: Is what you don't want based on your free understanding or on your pleasure and pain? Are you judging out of your revolt, or do you see the causation of this conflict and misery, and, because you see it, reject it? 

克：你不想要的东西，是基于你自由的了解，还是基于你的欢愉和痛苦？你的评判是出于你的反抗，还是你看清了这冲突和苦难的根源，因为你看清了它，就抛弃了它？

     Questioner: You're asking me too many things. All I know is that I want to live a different kind of life. I don't know what it means; I don't know why I'm seeking it; and, as I said, I'm utterly bewildered by it all. 

发问者：你问我太多事情了。我所有知道的只是我想过一种不同的生活。我不知道那是什么意思；我不知道我为什么追求它；而且，正如我所说，为此我极其困惑。

     Krishnamurti: Your basic question is, isn't it, how are you to live in this world? Before you find out let us first see what this world is. The world is not only all that surrounds us, it is also our relationship to all these things and people, to ourselves, to ideas. That is, our relationship to property, to people, to concepts - in fact our relationship to the stream of events which we call life. This is the world. We see division into nationalities, into religious, economic, political, social and ethnical groups; the whole world is broken up and is as fragmented outwardly as its human beings are inwardly. In fact, this outer fragmentation is the manifestation of the human being's inner division. 

克：你基本的问题是，你该怎样活在这个世界上，不是吗？在你找出答案之前，让我们先看看这个世界是什么。世界不只是我们周围的一切，它也是我们与所有这些事情和人们的关系，与我们自己、与想法的关系。也就是，我们与财产，与人们，与概念的关系――实际上是我们与我们称为生活的一连串事件的关系。这就是世界。我们看到世界划分成了民族，划分成了宗教的、经济的、政治的、社会的和种族的团体；整个世界破碎不堪，人类的内在和外在一样支离破碎。事实上，这种外在的支离破碎正是人类内在分裂的表现。

     Questioner: Yes, I see this fragmentation very clearly, and I am also beginning to see that the human being is responsible.
发问者：是的，我非常清楚地看到这种破碎，我也正开始看到人类是有责任的。

     Krishnamurti:You are the human being! 
克：你就是人类！

     Questioner: Then can I live differently from what I am myself? I'm suddenly realizing that if I am to live in a totally different way there must be a new birth in me, a new mind and heart, new eyes. And I realize also that this hasn't happened. I live the way I am, and the way I am has made life as it is. But where does one go from there? 

发问者：那么我能以不同于我自己现在的方式生活吗？我突然意识到，如果我要过一种完全不同的生活方式，我就必须新生，重生一颗新的头脑和心灵，一双新的眼睛。我也意识到这还没有发生。我以现有的方式生活着，我现有的生活方式把生活变成了现在这个样子。但是一个人要从这里走向哪里？

     Krishnamurti: You don't go anywhere from there! There is no going anywhere. The going, or the searching for the ideal, for what we think is better, gives us a feeling that we are progressing, that we are moving towards a better world. But this movement is no movement at all because the end has been projected out of our misery, confusion, greed and envy. So this end, which is supposed to be the opposite of what is, is really the same as what is, it is engendered by what is. Therefore it creates the conflict between what is and what should be. This is where our basic confusion and conflict arises. The end is not over there, not on the other side of the wall; the beginning and the end are here. 

克：从这儿你哪也不去！没有什么地方可去。去向，或者追寻理想，追求我们认为更好的，给我们一种感觉，好像我们正在进步，我们正在朝着一个更好的世界前进。但是这种运动根本不是运动，因为那终点是由我们的苦难、困惑、贪婪和嫉妒投射出来的。所以这个终点，本以为是与现实状况相反的，实际上和现实状况是一样的，它正是由现实状况产生的。因此，就在实际状况和应当如何之间制造了冲突。这就是我们的困惑和冲突根本的发源地。终点并不在那边，并不在墙的另一边；起点和终点都在这儿。

     Questioner: Wait a minute, sir, please; I don't understand this at all. Are you telling me that the ideal of what should be is the result of not understanding what is? Are you telling me that what should be is what is, and that this movement from what is to what should be isn't really a movement at all? 

发问者：请等一下，先生；我根本不明白这点。你是不是在告诉我，理想中的应当如何就是不了解现实状况的结果？你是不是在告诉我，应当如何就是现实状况，从现实状况向应当如何行进的这种运动，根本就不是真的运动？

     Krishnamurti: It is an idea; it is fiction. If you understand what is, what need is there for what should be? 

克：那是个想法；是虚构的。如果你了解了现实状况，还有什么必要有应当如何？

     Questioner: Is that so? I understand what is. I understand the bestiality of war, the horror of killing, and because I understand it I have this ideal of not killing. The ideal is born out of my understanding of what is, therefore it is not an escape.

发问者：是这样吗？我了解实际状况。我了解战争的残忍，杀戮的恐怖，因为我了解这些，所以我有了不杀生的理想。这个理想诞生于我对现实状况的了解，所以这不是一种逃避。

     Krishnamurti: If you understand that killing is terrible do you have to have an ideal in order not to kill? Perhaps we are not clear about the word understanding. When we say we understand something, in that is implied, isn't it, that we have learnt all it has to say? We have explored it and discovered the truth or the falseness of it. This implies also, doesn't it, that this understanding is not an intellectual affair, but that one has felt it deeply in one's heart? There is understanding only when the mind and the heart are in perfect harmony. Then one says "I have understood this, and finished with it", and it no longer has the vitality to breed further conflict. Do we both give the same meaning to that word understand? 

克：如果你了解了杀戮是可怕的，你还要有个不去杀生的理想吗？也许我们还没弄清了解这个词的意思。当我们说我们了解了某事，这难道不就意味着，我们已经学到了它要说的一切？我们已经探索过了，发现了它的真实或者它的谬误。这也意味着，这种了解不是一件智识上的事情，而是一个人在他的内心深处深切地体会到了，不是吗？只有当头脑和心灵处于完美的和谐中时，才有这种了解。然后一个人说“我了解了这点，结束了它”，它再也不会有进一步滋生冲突的能力了。我们是不是都给了解这个词赋予了相同的含义？

     Questioner: I hadn't before, but now I see that what you are saying is true. Yet I honestly don't understand, in that way, the total disorder of the world, which, as you so rightly pointed out, is my own disorder. How can I understand it? How can I completely learn about the disorder, the entire disorder and confusion of the world, and of myself? 

发问者：我以前没有看到，但是现在我看到你所说的是真实的。然而诚实地说，我并没有以那种方式了解到整个世界的失序，正如你确切指出的那样，那失序就是我自己的失序。我怎样才能了解这点？我要怎样才能完全了解失序，世界的和我自己的彻底失序和困惑？

     Krishnamurti: Do not use the word how, please. 
克：请不要用怎样这个词。

     Questioner: Why not? 
发问者：为什么不能用？

     Krishnamurti: The how implies that somebody is going to give you a method, a recipe, which, if you practise it, will bring about understanding. Can understanding ever come about through a method? Understanding means love and the sanity of the mind. And love cannot be practised or taught. The sanity of the mind can only come about when there is clear perception, seeing things as they are unemotionally, not sentimentally. Neither of these two things can be taught by another, nor by a system invented by yourself or by another. 

克：怎样这个词意味着某人要给你一个方法，一个诀窍，如果你练习它，会带来了解。了解难道能够通过方法得来吗？了解意味着爱和心智的清明健全。而爱无法被练习或者教授。只有清晰地觉知，不感情用事不多愁善感地如实看清事情本身，心智的清明健全才能发生。这两件事都无法被别人教授，也不能经由你自己或者别人发明的体系传授。

     Questioner: You are too persuasive, sir, or is it perhaps that you are too logical? Are you trying to influence me to see things as you see them? 

发问者：你太有说服力了，先生，还是也许你太擅长逻辑了？你是在试图影响我让我像你那样看待事情吗？

     Krishnamurti: God forbid! Influence in any form is destructive of love. Propaganda to make the mind sensitive, alert, will only make it dull and insensitive. So we are in no way trying to influence you or persuade you, or make you depend. We are only pointing out, exploring together. And to explore together you must be free, both of me and of your own prejudices and fears. Otherwise you go round and round in circles. So we must go back to our original question: how am I to live in this world? To live in this world we must deny the world. By that we mean: deny the ideal, the war, the fragmentation, the competition, the envy and so on. We don't mean deny the world as a schoolboy revolts against his parents. We mean deny it because we understand it. This understanding is negation. 

克：但愿不是如此！任何形式的影响都破坏了爱。想让心智变得敏感、警觉的宣传活动，只会将其变得迟钝和不敏感。所以我们根本不是在试图影响你或者说服你，或者让你依赖。我们只是指出来，一起探索。而要一起探索，你必须从我和你自己的偏见和恐惧中解脱出来。否则你只是在来回兜圈子。所以我们必须回到我们最初的问题：我要怎样活在这个世界上？要活在这个世界上我们必须否定这个世界。这意味着：否定理想、战争、支离破碎、竞争、嫉妒，等等。我们说否定这个世界的意思，不是像男学生那样叛逆他的父母。我们的意思是因为我们了解了它所以否定它。这种了解就是否定。

     Questioner: I am out of my depth. 

发问者：这超出了我能理解的深度。

     Krishnamurti: You said you do not want to live in the confusion, the dishonesty and ugliness of this world. So you deny it. But from what background do you deny it, why do you deny it? Do you deny it because you want to live a peaceful life, a life of complete security and enclosure, or do you deny it because you see what it actually is? 

克：你说你不想生活在这个困惑、不诚实和丑陋的世界中。所以你否定它。但你是从什么背景来否定它的，你为什么要否定它？你否定它，是不是因为你想过和平的生活，一种彻底安全和封闭的生活，还是因为你如实看清了它所以你才否定它的？

     Questioner: I think I deny it because I see around me what is taking place. Of course my prejudices and fear are all involved. So it is a mixture of what is actually taking place and my own anxiety. 

发问者：我想我否定它是因为我看到了周围发生着的事情。当然，其中都涉及到了我的偏见和恐惧。所以这是掺杂了实际发生的事情和我自己的焦虑的一种混合物。

     Krishnamurti: Which predominates, your own anxiety or the actual seeing of what is around you? If fear predominates, then you can't see what is actually going on around you, because fear is darkness, and in darkness you can see absolutely nothing. If you realize that, then you can see the world actually as it is, then you can see yourself actually as you are. Because you are the world, and the world is you; they are not two separate entities. 

克：哪个占主导地位，是你自己的焦虑，还是真实地看到了你周围的一切？如果恐惧占主导，那么你就不能看清你周围实际上发生着什么，因为恐惧是黑暗，在黑暗中你根本什么都看不见。如果你意识到了这一点，那么你就能如实地看清这个世界了，那么你就能如实地看清你自己了。因为你就是世界，世界就是你；他们不是两个分开的实体。

     Questioner: Would you please explain more fully what you mean by the world is me and I am the world? 

发问者：你能不能更充分地解释一下，你说的世界就是我和我就是世界是什么意思？

     Krishnamurti: Does this really need explaining? Do you want me to describe in detail what you are and show you that it is the same as what the world is? Will this description convince you that you are the world? Will you be convinced by a logical, sequential explanation showing you the cause and the effect? If you are convinced by careful description, will that give you understanding? Will it make you feel that you are the world, make you feel responsible for the world? It seems so clear that our human greed, envy, aggression and violence have brought about the society in which we live, a legalized acceptance of what we are. I think this is really sufficiently clear and let's not spend any more time on this issue. You see, we don't feel this, we don't love, therefore there is this division between me and the world. 

克：这真的需要解释吗？你是想让我详细描述你是什么，并且指给你看这和世界的样子是一样的吗？这解释能让你确信你就是世界吗？给你一个符合逻辑顺序的解释，指给你看原因和结果，你会因此确信吗？如果你因详细的描述而确信，那能让你有了解吗？它会让你感觉到你就是世界，让你感觉到要对这个世界负责吗？非常明显，是我们人类的贪婪，嫉妒，侵略，暴力造就了我们身处其中的这个社会，我们的样子被合法化地接受了。我想这点真的十分清楚了，让我们不要在这个问题上再花时间了。你看，我们没感觉到这点，我们不爱，所以就有了我和世界之间的这种分裂。

     Questioner: May I come back again tomorrow? 
发问者：我可以明天再来吗？

     * * * 
     He came back the next day eagerly, and there was the bright light of enquiry in his eyes. 
第二天他很热切地回来了，他的眼中有着探询的亮光。

     Questioner: I want, if you are willing, to go further into this question of how I am to live in this world. I do now understand, with my heart and my mind, as you explained yesterday, the utter importance of ideals. I had quite a long struggle with it and have come to see the triviality of ideals. You are saying, aren't you, that when there are no ideals or escapes there is only the past, the thousand yesterdays which make up the "me"? So when I ask: "How am I to live in this world?" I have not only put a wrong question, but I have also made a contradictory statement, for I have placed the world and the "me" in opposition to each other. And this contradiction is what I call living. So when I ask the question, "How am I to live in this world?" I am really trying to improve this contradiction, to justify it, to modify it, because that's all I know; I don't know anything else. 

发问者：我想，如果你愿意的话，进一步深入我要怎样活在这个世界上这个问题。现在我确实以我的心灵和我的头脑了解到了，正如你昨天解释的，理想绝对的重要性。我曾与它做过漫长的斗争，已经看到了理想的琐碎。你说，如果没有理想或者逃避，就只有过去，一千个昨天构成的“我”，不是吗？所以当我问：“我要怎样活在这个世界上？”我不仅仅是提出了一个错误的问题，而且我也做了一个自相矛盾的表述，因为我把世界和“我”放在彼此对立的位置上。而这种矛盾，就是我们所谓的生活。所以当我问这个问题，“我要怎样活在这个世界上？”，我实际上是在努力强化这种矛盾，合理化它，调整它，因为这是我知道的所有事情；别的我什么也不知道。

     Krishnamurti: This then is the question we have now: must living always be in the past, must all activity spring from the past, is all relationship the outcome of the past, is living the complex memory of the past? That is all we know - the past modifying the present. And the future is the outcome of this past acting through the present. So the past, the present and the future are all the past. And this past is what we call living. The mind is the past, the brain is the past, the feelings are the past, and action coming from these is the positive activity of the known. This whole process is your life and all the relationship and activity that you know. So when you ask how you are to live in this world you are asking for a change of prisons. 

克：那么这就是我们现在有的问题了：是不是必须总是生活在过去，是不是所有的行为都必须源于过去，是不是所有的关系都是过去的结果，生活是不是过去的复杂记忆？这是我们知道的所有东西――过去调整现在。而未来是这个过去通过现在运作的结果。所以过去，现在和未来都是过去。而这过去我们称之为生活。心智是过去，头脑是过去，感情是过去，从这些而来的行动是来自已知的正向活动。这整个过程就是你所知道的你的生活，所有的关系和活动。所以当你问你要怎样活在这个世界上，你只是想要换换监狱。

     Questioner: I don't mean that. What I mean is: I see very clearly that my process of thinking and doing is the past working through the present to the future. This is all I know, and that's a fact. And I realize that unless there is a change in this structure I am caught in it, I am of it. From this the question inevitably arises: how am I to change? 

发问者：我不是这个意思。我的意思是：我非常清晰地看到，我思考和行为的过程是过去通过现在运作到未来。这是我知道的所有东西，这是个事实。我意识到除非我受困于其中的这个结构有种转变，否则我就是它的一部分。从这个问题必然产生另一个问题：我要怎样转变？

     Krishnamurti: To live in this world sanely there must be a radical change of the mind and of the heart. 
克：要清明健全地活在这个世界上，头脑和心灵必须要有彻底的转变。

     Questioner: Yes, but what do you mean by change? How am I to change if whatever I do is the movement of the past? I can only change myself, nobody else can change me. And I don't see what it means - to change. 

发问者：是的，但是你说的转变是什么意思？如果我无论做什么都是过去的运动，那我要如何转变？我只能改变我自己，别人无法改变我。我不知道这意味着什么――去转变。

     Krishnamurti: So the question "How am I to live in this world?" has now become "How am I to change?" - bearing in mind that the how doesn't mean a method, but is an enquiry to understand. What is change? Is there any change at all? Or can you ask whether there is any change at all only after there has been a total change and revolution? Let's begin again to find out what this word means. Change implies a movement from what is to something different. Is this something different merely an opposite, or does it belong to a different order altogether? If it is merely an opposite then it is not different at all, because all opposites are mutually dependent, like hot and cold, high and low. The opposite is contained within, and determined by, its opposite; it exists only in comparison, and things that are comparative have different measures of the same quality, and therefore they are similar. So change to an opposite is no change at all. Even if this going towards what seems different gives you the feeling that you are really doing something, it is an illusion. 

克：所以“我要怎样活在这个世界上？”这个问题现在变成了“我要如何转变？”――请铭记在心，如何并不意味着一个方法，而是为了了解的一种探询。什么是转变？究竟有任何转变这回事吗？或者你能不能问，是否只有在一场彻底的转变和革命之后，才可能有所改变？让我们还是先来弄清这个词的意思。转变意味着从现实状况向不同的某物的运动。这某物只是个对立面呢，还是它属于一种全然不同的秩序？如果它只是对立面，那么它根本没有任何不同，因为所有的对立面都是相互依存的，像热和冷，高和低。对立面包含在它的对立面中，并且由其决定；它只存在于比较中，比较级的事物具有的是相同品质的不同尺度，因而它们是相似的。所以变成对立面根本不是转变。即使这种似乎在朝着不同方向的行进给你一种你确实在做什么的感觉，那还是个幻觉。

     Questioner: Let me absorb this for a moment. 
发问者：让我先消化一下这些。

     Krishnamurti: So what are we concerned with now? Is it possible to bring about in ourselves the birth of a new order altogether that is not related to the past? The past is irrelevant to this enquiry, and trivial, because it is irrelevant to the new order. 

克：那我们现在关注的是什么？是否有可能在我们自己身上诞生一种与过去无关的全然的新秩序？过去与这探询无关，过去是琐碎的，因为它与那新秩序无关。

     Questioner: How can you say it is trivial and irrelevant? We've been saying all along that the past is the issue, and now you say it is irrelevant. 

发问者：你怎么能说它是琐碎的不相干的？我们一直在说过去就是问题所在，现在你说它是不相干的。

     Krishnamurti: The past seems to be the only issue because it is the only thing that holds our minds and hearts. It alone is important to us. But why do we give importance to it? Why is this little space all-important? If you are totally immersed in it, utterly committed to it, then you will never listen to change. The man who is not wholly committed is the only one capable of listening, enquiring and asking. Only then will he be able to see the triviality of this little space. So, are you completely immersed, or is your head above the water? If your head is above the water then you can see that this little thing is trivial. Then you have room to look around. How deeply are you immersed? Nobody can answer this for you except yourself. In the very asking of this question there is already freedom and, therefore, one is not afraid. Then your vision is extensive. When this pattern of the past holds you completely by the throat, then you acquiesce, accept, obey, follow, believe. It is only when you are aware that this is not freedom that you are starting to climb out of it. So we are again asking: what is change, what is revolution? Change is not a movement from the known to the known, and all political revolutions are that. This kind of change is not what we are talking about. To progress from being a sinner to being a saint is to progress from one illusion to another. So now we are free of change as a movement from this to that. 

克：过去似乎是唯一的问题，因为它是唯一掌控我们头脑和心灵的东西。它本身对我们是重要的。但是，我们为什么要赋予它重要性？为什么这个狭小的空间那么重要？如果你完全沉浸其中，彻底禁锢其中，那么你就永远不会去聆听着改变。没有完全禁锢其中的人，是仅有的能够聆听，探究和质询的人。只有这时，他才能看到这个狭小空间的琐碎。所以，你是完全沉浸其中，还是你的头还在水面之上？如果你的头在水面之上，那么你就能看到这个小东西是琐碎的。那么你就有空间去看看周围了。你沉浸其中的程度有多深？没有人能回答这个问题，除了你自己。在提出这个问题本身时，就有了自由，所以你就不会害怕。接着你的视野就宽阔了。当这种过去的模式完全扼住你的喉咙，你就会默认，接受，服从，追随，相信。只有当你意识到这不是自由时，你才能开始爬出来。所以我们再问一次这个问题：什么是转变，什么是革命？转变不是从已知到已知的运动，所有的政治革命都是这样。这种改变不是我们正在讨论的东西。从一个罪人进步为一个圣人，只是从一个幻觉向另一个幻觉前进而已。所以现在我们摆脱了从这到那的运动这样的改变。

     Questioner: Have I really understood this? What am I to do with anger, violence and fear when they arise in me? Am I to give them free reign? How am I to deal with them? There must be change there, otherwise I am what I was before. 

发问者：我真的明白了这点吗？当我内在产生了愤怒、暴力和恐惧，我该拿它们怎么办？我要让它们自由发挥吗？我该怎么处理它们？那里必须得有改变，否则我就会和以前一样。

     Krishnamurti: Is it clear to you that these things cannot be overcome by their opposites? If so, you have only the violence, the envy, the anger, the greed. The feeling arises as the result of a challenge, and then it is named. This naming of the feeling re-establishes it in the old pattern. If you do not name it, which means you do not identify yourself with it, then the feeling is new and it will go away by itself. The naming of it strengthens it and gives it a continuity which is the whole process of thought. 

克：这些事情不能由它们的对立面来克服，这一点对你来说清楚了吗？如果是的话，你就只有暴力，嫉妒，愤怒和贪婪。这感觉作为一种挑战的结果出现，随后它就被命名了。对感觉的命名就把它在旧有的模式里重建了。如果你不给它命名，也就是说你不把自己与它认同在一起，那么这感觉就是新鲜的，它会自己消失掉。对它的命名加强了它，赋予了它延续性，这正是思想的整个过程。

     Questioner: I am being driven into a comer where I see myself actually as I am, and I see how trivial I am. From there what comes next? 

发问者：我被赶到了一个角落里，我如实地看到了自己的样子，我也看到了自己有多么琐碎。从这里接下来会发生什么？

     Krishnamurti: Any movement from what I am strengthens what I am. So change is no movement at all. Change is the denial of change, and now only can I put this question: is there a change at all? This question can be put only when all movement of thought has come to an end, for thought must be denied for the beauty of non-change. In the total negation of all movement of thought away from what is, is the ending of what is.

克：任何离开我的现实状况的运动，都会增强我的这种状况。所以那改变根本不是运动。转变是对改变的否定，只有现在我才能提出这个问题：究竟有转变这回事吗？只有当所有思想运动都停止的时候，才能提出这个问题，因为思想必须因为不变的美而被否定。在对所有离开实际状况的思想运动的全然否定中，就有了现实状况的终结。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'RELATIONSHIP'
《转变的紧迫性》之“关系”

     Questioner: I have come a long way to see you. Although I am married and have children I have been away from them, wandering, meditating, as a mendicant. I have puzzled greatly over this very complicated problem of relationship. When I go into a village and they give me food, I am related to the giver, as I am related to my wife and children. In another village when somebody gives me clothes I am related to the whole factory that produced them. I am related to the earth on which I walk, to the tree under which I take shelter, to everything. And yet I am alone, isolated. When I am with my wife, I am separate even during sex - it is an act of separation. When I go into a temple it is still the worshipper being related to the thing he worships: separation again. So in all relationships, as I see it, there is this separation, duality, and behind or through it, or around it, there is a peculiar sense of unity. When I see the beggar it hurts me, for I am like him and I feel as he feels - lonely, desperate, sick, hungry. I feel for him, and with him, for his meaningless existence. Some rich man comes along in his big motor car and gives me a lift, but I feel uncomfortable in his company, yet at the same time I feel for him and am related to him. So I have meditated upon this strange phenomenon of relationship. Can we on this lovely morning, overlooking this deep valley, talk over together this question? 

发问者：我走了很长的路来见你。尽管我结婚了，有了孩子，但是我一直远离他们，像一个托钵僧一样流浪，冥想。对于关系这个非常复杂的问题，我感到极其困惑。当我进到一个村子里，他们给我食物，我和施与者有了某种关系，就像我与我的妻子和孩子有关系一样。在另一个村子里，有人给衣服，我就与生产衣服的整个工厂有了关系。我与我行走于其上的土地有关，与我在其下遮荫的树木有关，与所有东西都有关系。然而，我还是那么孤独，隔绝。当我和我妻子在一起时，即使在性中我也是分离的-这是种分离的行为。当我去到寺庙里，还有膜拜者与他所膜拜的东西有关系：这又是分离。所以在所有的关系中，如我所见，都有这种分离，二元性，而在其后或其中或周围，有一种特别的一体感。当我看到乞丐，那让我心痛，因为我和他很像，我感觉到他的感受-孤独，分离，疾病，饥饿。我对他毫无意义的存在与他感同身受，与他在一起。有富人坐着大汽车过来，载我一程，但是有他的陪伴我感觉不舒服，但是同时我也能感觉到他，我与他有关系。所以我对这奇怪的关系现象进行冥想。我们能不能在这个可爱的早晨，眺望这幽深的山谷，一起来谈谈这个问题？

     Krishnamurti: Is all relationship out of this isolation? Can there be relationship as long as there is any separateness, division? Can there be relationship if there is no contact, not only physical but at every level of our being, with another? One may hold the hand of another and yet be miles away, wrapped in one's own thoughts and problems. One may be in a group and yet be painfully alone. So one asks: can there be any kind of relationship with the tree, the flower, the human being, or with the skies and the lovely sunset, when the mind in its activities is isolating itself? And can there be any contact ever, with anything at all, even when the mind is not isolating itself? 

克：所有的关系都出于这种分离吗？只要有任何分离，分别，还可能有关系吗？如果不只是在身体上，而且在我们生命的每个层面上，和另一个人没有联结，可能有关系存在吗？一个人也许能牵着另一个人的手但同时相隔数英里之遥，包裹在他自己的思绪和问题中。一个人也许在一个团体中，但是痛苦地孤独着。所以有人会问：当头脑在它自己的活动中隔绝自己，那么它与树，与花，与人类，或者与天空和可爱的落日有任何关系吗？即使头脑不隔绝自己，它与任何东西究竟可曾有任何联结？

     Questioner: Everything and everybody has its own existence. Everything and everybody is shrouded in its own existence. I can never penetrate this enclosure of another's being. However much I love someone, his existence is separate from mine. I can perhaps touch him from the outside, mentally or physically, but his existence is his own, and mine is for ever on the outside of it. Similarly he cannot reach me. Must we always remain two separate entities, each in his own world, with his own limitations, within the prison of his own consciousness? 

发问者：每件事物和每个人都有自己的存在形式。每件事物和每个人都被其自身的存在形式遮蔽了。我永远无法穿透另一个存在者的这种包裹。不管我多么爱一个人，他的存在与我的存在是分离的。我也许能在心理上或者身体上从外在接触到他，但是他的存在是他自己的，我的存在永远都在其外。同样他也够不到我。我们必须始终作为两个分离的实体存在吗，每个人在他自己的世界里，带着他自己的局限，在他自己意识的牢笼里？

     Krishnamurti: Each lives within his own tissue, you in yours, he in his. And is there any possibility, ever, of breaking through this tissue? Is this tissue - this shroud, this envelope - the word? Is it made up of your concern with yourself and his with himself, your desires opposed to his? Is this capsule the past? It is all of this, isn't it? It isn't one particular thing but a whole bundle which the mind carries about. You have your burden, another has his. Can these burdens ever be dropped so that the mind meets the mind, the heart meets the heart? That is really the question, isn't it? 

克：每个生命在他自己的躯壳里，你在你的躯壳里，他在他的躯壳里。而究竟有没有任何可能穿透这躯壳？这躯壳――这包裹，这皮囊――是这词语吗？它是不是由你对你自己的关注、他对他自己的关心，以及你与他相悖的欲望，这些东西构成的？你有你的负担，另一个人有他的。这些负担到底能不能放下，这样就能头脑联结头脑，心灵沟通心灵？这是真正的问题，不是吗？

     Questioner: Even if all these burdens are dropped, if that were possible, even then he remains in his skin with his thoughts, and I in mine with my thoughts. Sometimes the gap is narrow, sometimes it is wide, but we are always two separate islands. The gap seems to be widest when we care most about it and try to bridge it. 

发问者：即使所有这些负担都放下了，如果可能的话，即使那时他还是留在自己的皮囊里，带着他的思想，我带着我的思想留在我的躯壳里。这隔阂有时候窄些，有时候宽些，但是我们始终是两个分离的岛屿。当我们极其在意这一点，想要在其中搭建桥梁的时候，这隔阂反而显得最宽。

     Krishnamurti: You can identify yourself with that villager or with that flaming bougainvillaea - which is a mental trick to pretend unity. Identification with something is one of the most hypocritical states - to identify oneself with a nation, with a belief and yet remain alone is a favourite trick to cheat loneliness. Or you identify yourself so completely with your belief that you are that belief, and this is a neurotic state. Now let's put away this urge to be identified with a person or an idea or a thing. That way there is no harmony, unity or love. So our next question is: can you tear through the envelope so that there is no more envelope? Then only would there be a possibility of total contact. How is one to tear through the envelope? The "how" doesn't mean a method, but rather an enquiry which might open the door. 

克：你能把自己和那个村民或者那盛放的九重葛花认同在一起――这只是一个假装一体的心理伎俩。与某物相认同是最深的催眠状态之一――把自己与一个国家，与一个信念认同起来，而又保持独立，这是人们最爱用的一个欺骗孤独的伎俩。或者你把自己完全认同于你的信仰，以致于你就是那个信仰，而这是一种神经质状态。现在让我们把这种想要和一个人或者一个观念或者一件东西相认同的渴望放在一边。要是那样就没有和谐，没有一体或者爱。所以我们下一个问题是：你能不能撕开这躯壳，然后就再没有包裹了？只有这时，才有完全联结的可能。人要怎样穿破那包裹？“怎样”并不意味着方法，而是指也许会打开那扇门的一种质询。

     Questioner: Yes, no other contact can be called relationship at all, though we say it is. 

发问者：是的，根本没有其他的联结可以被称为关系，尽管我们说那是关系。

     Krishnamurti: Do we tear the envelope bit by bit or cut through it immediately? If we tear it bit by bit, which is what analysts sometimes claim to do, the job is never done. It is not through time that you can break down this separation. 

克：我们是一点点地撕开这包裹还是立即穿透它？如果我们一点点地撕开，也就是分析师们有时候声称要做的，那这个工作就永远做不完了。你不能通过时间来打破这种分离。

     Questioner: Can I enter into the envelope of another? And isn't his envelope his very existence, his heartbeats and his blood, his feelings and his memories? 

发问者：我能进入另一个人的包裹吗？他的包裹不就是他本身的存在吗，他的心跳和他的血液，他的感情和他的记忆？

     Krishnamurti: Are you not the very envelope itself? 
克：你不就是那包裹本身吗？

     Questioner: Yes. 
发问者：是的。

     Krishnamurti: The very movement to tear through the other envelope, or extend outside of your own, is the very affirmation and the action of your own envelope: you are the envelope. So you are the observer of the envelope, and you are also the envelope itself. In this case you are the observer and the observed: so is he, and that's how we remain. And you try to reach him and he tries to reach you. Is this possible? You are the island surrounded by seas, and he is also the island surrounded by seas. You see that you are both the island and the sea; there is no division between them; you are the entire earth with the sea. Therefore there is no division as the island and the sea. The other person doesn't see this. He is the island surrounded by sea; he tries to reach you, or, if you are foolish enough, you may try to reach him. Is that possible? How can there be a contact between a man who is free and another who is bound? Since you are the observer and the observed, you are the whole movement of the earth and the sea. But the other, who doesn't understand this, is still the island surrounded by water. He tries to reach you and is everlastingly failing because he maintains his insularity. It is only when he leaves it and is, like you, open to the movement of the skies, the earth, and the sea, that there can be contact. The one who sees that the barrier is himself can no longer have a barrier. Therefore he, in himself, is not separate at all. The other has not seen that the barrier is himself and so maintains the belief in his separateness. How can this man reach the other? It is not possible. 

克：去撕破另一个包裹，或者想延伸到你自己的包裹之外，这种行为本身正是你自身包裹的行为以及对其的肯定：你就是那包裹。所以你是那包裹的观察者，同时你又是那包裹本身。在这种情况下，你既是观察者又是被观察者：他也一样，我们就是这样保持原样的。而你想够到他，他也试图够到你。这可能吗？你是被海水包围的岛屿，他也是被海水包围的岛屿。你看到你既是岛屿也是海水；它们之间没有分离；你是拥有海洋的整个大地。因此没有岛屿和海水的划分。而另一个人没有看到这点。他是被海水包围的岛屿；他试图够到你，或者，如果你够蠢的话，你也许会努力去够到他。这可能吗？一个自由的人和一个被束缚的人之间怎么可能有联结呢？既然你同时是观察者和被观察者，你就是大地和海洋的整体运动。但是另一个人，他不明白这点，他还是那个被水包围的岛屿。他努力够到你，但永远都会失败，因为他保持着他的孤立。只有当他离开孤立状态，像你一样，向天空，大地，海洋的运动敞开怀抱，才可能有联结。看到障碍就是他自己的人，就不会再有障碍了。因此，他本身完全不是分离的。另一个人没有看到障碍就是他自己，所以保持着对他的分离状态的信念。这个人怎么可能够到另一个人？不可能。

     * * * 
     Questioner: If we may I should like to continue from where we left off yesterday. You were saying that the mind is the maker of the envelope around itself, and that this envelope is the mind. I really don't understand this. Intellectually I can agree, but the nature of perception eludes me. I should like very much to understand it - not verbally but actually feel it - so that there is no conflict in my life. 

发问者：如果可以，我希望我们从昨天停下来的地方继续探讨。你说过头脑是它自身包裹的制造者，而这个包裹就是头脑。我真的不理解这点。从智识上我能同意，但是我没有抓住那见解的本质。我非常想理解它――不是从字面上，而是真正地感受到它――那样我的生活里就没有冲突了。

     Krishnamurti: There is the space between what the mind calls the envelope which it has made, and itself. There is the space between the ideal and the action. In these different fragmentations of space between the observer and the observed, or between different things it observes, is all conflict and struggle, and all the problems of life. There is the separation between this envelope around me and the envelope around another. In that space is all our existence, all our relationship and battle. 

克：头脑自己制造的所谓包裹，与头脑本身之间，有一种距离。在理想和行动之间有种距离。在观察者和被观察者，或者它观察的不同事物之间，在这些支离破碎的不同空间里，满是冲突和挣扎，以及生活的所有问题。在我的包裹和别人的包裹之间，有着分离。我们的所有存在，我们的所有关系和争斗，都在这个空间里。

     Questioner: When you talk of the division between the observer and the observed do you mean these fragmentations of space in our thinking and in our daily actions? 

发问者：当你谈到观察者和被观察者之间的分裂，你的意思是不是指我们的思维和日常行为中的这些支离破碎的空间？

     Krishnamurti: What is this space? There is space between you and your envelope, the space between him and his envelope, and there is the space between the two envelopes. These spaces all appear to the observer. What are these spaces made of? How do they come into being? What is the quality and the nature of these divided spaces? If we could remove these fragmentary spaces what would happen? 

克：这空间这距离是什么？你和你的包裹之间有距离，他和他的包裹之间有距离，两个包裹之间也有距离。这些空间这些距离观察者都看到了。这些距离是什么组成的？它们是怎么形成的？这些分割的空间的品质和本质是什么？如果我们能去除这些支离破碎的空间，那会发生什么？

     Questioner: There would then be true contact on all levels of one's being. 
发问者：那样一个人存在的所有层面都会有真正的联结。

     Krishnamurti: Is that all? 
克：就这些吗？

     Questioner: There would be no more conflict, for all conflict is relationship across these spaces. 

发问者：就不再有冲突，因为所有的冲突都是跨过这些距离的关系。

     Krishnamurti: Is that all? When this space actually disappears - not verbally or intellectually - but actually disappears - there is complete harmony, unity, between you and him, between you and another. In this harmony you and he cease and there is only this vast space which can never be broken up. The small structure of the mind comes to an end, for the mind is fragmentation. 

克：这就是所有的了吗？当这个距离真的消失了――不是字面上的或者智识上的――而是真的消失了――你和他之间，你和另一个人之间，就会有完全的和谐，一体。在这种和谐中，你和他都消失了，只有这种永远不会被打破的广阔空间。头脑的狭小结构结束了，因为头脑就是支离破碎的。

     Questioner: I really can't understand this at all, though I have a deep feeling within me that it is so. I can see that when there is love this actually takes place, but I don't know that love. It's not with me all the time. It is not in my heart. I see it only as if through a misty glass. I can't honestly grasp it with all my being. Could we, as you suggested, consider what these spaces are made of, how they come into being? 

发问者：我真的完全不明白这点，尽管我内心深深地感觉到就是这么回事。我能看到当有爱的时候，这些就会真的发生，但是我不知道那种爱。我一直没有这种爱。它不在我心里。我好像只能透过一片毛玻璃看到它。老实说我无法用我的整个存在把握住它。正如你所建议的，我们能不能思考一下这些空间距离是由什么组成的，它们是怎么形成的？

     Krishnamurti: Let's be quite sure that we both understand the same thing when we use the word space. There is the physical space between people and things, and there is the psychological space between people and things. Then there is also the space between the idea and the actual. So all this, the physical and psychological, is space, more or less limited and defined. We are not now talking of the physical space. We are talking of the psychological space between people and the psychological space in the human being himself, in his thoughts and activities. How does this space come about? Is it fictitious, illusory, or is it real? Feel it, be aware of it, make sure you haven't just got a mental image of it, bear in mind that the description is never the thing. Be quite sure that you know what we are talking about. Be quite aware that this limited space, this division, exists in you: don't move from there if you don't understand. Now how does this space come about? 

克：让我们非常明确一点，我们用空间距离这个词的时候，理解的都是同一个意思。人们和事物之间有物理距离，人们和事物之间也有心理距离。而观念和现实之间也有距离。那么所有这些物理上的和心理上的距离，或多或少都是有限的确定的。我们谈的不是物理距离。我们谈的是人们之间的心理距离，一个人本身内在的，他的思想和行为中的心理距离。这种距离是怎么形成的？它是虚假的幻觉，还是真实的？感觉一下，觉察到它，确认你不是只对它有了个心理意象，请把这点记在心里，描述永非所指之物。要非常确定你知道我们在谈什么。非常清楚地知道，你身上存在着这有限的空间，这种分隔：如果你不明白，不要从那里离开。那么这空间这距离是怎么形成的？

     Questioner: We see the physical space between things.... 
发问者：我们看到事物之间的物理距离....

     Krishnamurti: Don't explain anything; just feel your way into it. We are asking how this space has come into being. Don't give an explanation or a cause, but remain with this space and feel it. Then the cause and the description will have very little meaning and no value. This space has come into being because of thought, which is the "me", the word - which is the whole division. Thought itself is this distance, this division. Thought is always breaking itself up into fragments and creating division. Thought always cuts up what it observes into fragments within space - as you and me, yours and mine, me and my thoughts, and so on. This space, which thought has created between what it observes, has become real; and it is this space that divides. Then thought tries to build a bridge over this division, thus playing a trick upon itself all the time, deceiving itself and hoping for unity. 

克：不要解释任何事情；只是深入感觉一下。我们在问这距离是怎么产生的。不要给出一个解释或者原因，而是与这距离共处，感受它。然后原因和描述就会没什么意义和价值了。这距离的产生，是由于思想，也就是“我”，这个词――就是整个分隔。思想本身就是这距离，这分隔。思想总是把自己打成碎片，制造分裂。思想总是把它观察的东西切割成距离中的碎片――切割成你和我，你的和我的，我和我的思想，等等。这个距离，是思想在它观察的东西之间制造的，这距离变得真实起来；是这种距离在分割。然后思想试图在这种分割之上架起桥梁，总是这样跟自己耍个诡计，欺骗自己，希望找到合一。

     Questioner: That reminds me of the old statement about thought: it is a thief disguising himself as a policeman in order to catch the thief. 

发问者：这让我想起一句关于思想的老话：它是把自己伪装成警察的小偷，想要抓到这个小偷。

     Krishnamurti: Don't bother to quote, sir, however ancient it is. We are considering what actually is going on. In seeing the truth of the nature of thought and its activities, thought becomes quiet. Thought being quiet, not made quiet, is there space? 

克：不用费事去引用了，先生，不管它有多古老。我们考虑的是现在实际上发生着什么。看到了思想及其行为本质的真相，思想就变得安静了。思想自己安静下来，不是让它安静下来，那么是不是就有了空间？

     Questioner: It is thought itself which now rushes in to answer this question. 

发问者：是思想本身现在急于回答这个问题。

     Krishnamurti: Exactly! Therefore we do not even ask the question. The mind now is completely harmonious, without fragmentation; the little space has ceased and there is only space. When the mind is completely quiet there is the vastness of space and silence. 

克：一点都不错！所以我们甚至都不要问这个问题。头脑现在是彻底和谐了，没有分裂；那狭小的距离止息了，只剩下空间。当头脑完全安静下来，就有了无限的空间和寂静。

     Questioner: So I begin to see that my relationship to another is between thought and thought; whatever I answer is the noise of thought, and realizing it, I am silent. 

发问者：那我开始看到我与别人的关系只是思想和思想之间的关系；不管我怎么回答都是思想的噪音，意识到这点，我就安静了。

     Krishnamurti: This silence is the benediction.
克：这种寂静就是至福。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'CONFLICT'
《转变的紧迫性》之“冲突”

     Questioner: I find myself in a great deal of conflict with everything about me; and also everything within me is in conflict. People have spoken of divine order; nature is harmonious; it seems that man is the only animal who violates this order, making so much misery for others and for himself. When I wake up in the morning I see from my window little birds fighting with each other, but they soon separate and fly away, whereas I carry this war with myself and with others inside me all the time; there is no escaping it. I wonder if I can ever be at peace with myself. I must say I should like to find myself in complete harmony with everything about me and with myself. As one sees from this window the quiet sea and the light on the water, one has a feeling deep within oneself that there must be a way of living without these endless quarrels with oneself and with the world. Is there any harmony at all, anywhere? Or is there only everlasting disorder? If there is harmony, at what level can it exist? Or does it only exist on the top of some mountain which the burning valleys can never know? 

发问者：我发现自己处于大量的冲突中，与我周围的一切都冲突不断；而且我内在的一切也是冲突的。人们说起过神圣的秩序；自然界是和谐有序的；似乎只有人类是唯一违背这秩序的动物，给别人和自己制造了如此多的苦难。我早上醒来的时候，从窗口看到小鸟在互相交战，但是它们很快就散开了飞走了，但是我把自己内在的和自己和别人的这种战争一直背负在身上；完全无法逃避。我想知道我究竟能否与自己和平相处。我不得不说，我想发现自己与我周围的每件事和我自己是处于完全和谐中的。当一个人从这窗口望出去，看到平静的大海和水面上的光芒，他内心深处深深地感觉到，必然有一种生活方式，其中没有这些与自己与世界的无尽争吵。不管在哪里，究竟可有任何的和谐？还是只有无休止的失序？如果有和谐，那么它存在于哪个层面上？还是它只能存在于某座高山之巅，而这是燃烧的山谷永远无法知道的？

     Krishnamurti: Can one go from one to the other? Can one change that which is to that which is not? Can disharmony be transformed into harmony? 

克：一个人能由此及彼吗？他能把是什么的变成不是什么吗？不和谐能被转化成和谐吗？

     Questioner: Is conflict necessary then? It may perhaps, after all, be the natural order of things. 

发问者：那冲突是必然的了？毕竟，那也许就是事物的自然规律。

     Krishnamurti: If one accepted that, one would have to accept everything society stands for: wars, ambitious competition, an aggressive way of life - all the brutal violence of men, inside and outside of his so-called holy places. Is this natural? Will this bring about any unity? Wouldn't it be better for us to consider these two facts - the fact of conflict with all its complicated struggles, and the fact of the mind demanding order, harmony, peace, beauty, love? 

克：如果一个人接受了这一点，那么他就得接受社会主张的一切：战争，野心勃勃的竞争，咄咄逼人的生活方式――人类所有野蛮残忍的暴力，存在于他所谓的神圣之地的里里外外。这是自然的吗？这会带来任何和谐一体吗？我们难道不该来考虑一下这两个事实――冲突的事实及其所有复杂的争斗，以及想要秩序、和谐、和平、美和爱的头脑的事实？

     Questioner: I know nothing about harmony. I see it in the heavens, in the seasons, in the mathematical order of the universe. But that doesn't give me order in my own heart and mind; the absolute order of mathematics is not my order. I have no order, I am in deep disorder. I know there are different theories of gradual evolution towards the so-called perfection of political utopias and religious heavens, but this leaves me where I actually am. The world may perhaps be perfect in ten thousand years from now, but in the meantime I'm having hell. 

发问者：关于和谐，我一无所知。我在天空中，季节中，宇宙的数学秩序中看到了和谐。但是，那并不能给我自己的心灵和头脑带来秩序；数学的绝对秩序不是我的秩序。我没有秩序，我处于深深的失序中。我知道有很多种逐渐进化的理论，声称能通向所谓完美的政治乌托邦和宗教天堂，但是这把我带到了我现在实际的这个样子。世界也许会在从现在起的一万年后变得完美，但是在这个过程中我身处地狱。

     Krishnamurti: We see the disorder in ourselves and in society. Both are very complex. There are really no answers. One can examine all this very carefully, analyse it closely, look for causes of disorder in oneself and in society, expose them to the light and perhaps believe that one will free the mind from them. This analytical process is what most people are doing, intelligently or unintelligently, and it doesn't get anybody very far. Man has analysed himself for thousands of years, and produced no result but literature! The many saints have paralysed themselves in concepts and ideological prisons; they too are in conflict. The cause of our conflict is this everlasting duality of desire: the endless corridor of the opposites creating envy greed ambition aggression, fear, and all the rest of it. Now I wonder if there isn't an altogether different approach to this problem? The acceptance of this struggle and all our efforts to get out of it have become traditional. The whole approach is traditional. In this traditional approach the mind operates but, as we see, the traditional approach of the mind creates more disorder. So the problem is not how to end disorder, but rather whether the mind can look at it freed from tradition. And then perhaps there may be no problem at all. 

克：我们看到了自己身上和社会中的失序。两者都非常复杂。真的没有答案。一个人能够非常仔细地研究这一点，近距离地分析，寻找自己和社会失序的原因，把它们曝光，相信或许如此他就能把心智从中解脱出来。这种分析过程就是大多数人正在做的，不管用聪明还是不聪明的方式，但是这并没有让任何人走多远。人类分析自己分析了几千年，除了文学没有得到任何结果！很多圣人把自己麻痹在概念和思想体系的牢笼里；他们也满是冲突。我们冲突的原因是欲望那无穷的二元性：对立面那没有尽头的通道，制造着嫉妒、贪婪、野心、侵略、恐惧以及等等一切。现在我想知道是不是有一种完全不同的方式来着手这个问题？接受这种挣扎，接受我们为了从中摆脱所做的一切努力，已经成为传统。整个处理方式都是传统的。头脑在这种传统中运作，但是，正如我们所看到的，头脑传统的方式制造了更多的冲突。所以问题不是如何终结失序，而是头脑能否从传统中解脱出来看这个问题。然后也许就根本没有问题了。

     Questioner: I don't follow you at all. 

发问者：我完全不明白你的意思。

     Krishnamurti: There is this fact of disorder. There is no doubt about it: it is an actual fact. The traditional approach to this fact is to analyse it, to try to discover the cause of it and overcome the cause, or else to invent its opposite and battle towards that. This is the traditional approach with its disciplines, drills, controls, suppressions, sublimations. Man has done this for thousands upon thousands of years; it has led nowhere. Can we abandon this approach completely and look at the problem entirely differently - that is, not try to go beyond it, or to resolve it, or to overcome it, or to escape from it? Can the mind do this? 

克：存在着失序这个事实。这一点毫无疑问：这确实是个事实。处理这个事实的传统方式是分析它，试图发现它的原因，克服那原因，或者编造出它的对立面，并为此而奋斗。这就是传统的方式，通过戒律，训练，控制，压抑和高尚化。人们这么做了几千年；它哪儿也没去到。我们能不能完全抛弃这种方式，以完全不同的方式来看问题――也就是，不去试图超越它，解决它，克服它，或者逃避它？头脑能否做到这点？

     Questioner: Perhaps.... 

发问者：也许...

     Krishnamurti: Don't answer so quickly! This is a tremendous thing I am asking you. From the beginning of time man has tried to deal with all his problems, either by going beyond them, resolving them, overcoming them or escaping from them. Please do not think you can push all that aside so lightly, simply with a verbal agreement. It makes up the very structure of everybody's mind. Can the mind now, understanding all this non-verbally, actually free itself from the tradition? This traditional way of dealing with the conflict never solves it, but only adds more conflict: being violent, which is conflict, I add the additional conflict of trying to become non-violent. All social morality and all religious prescriptions are that. Are we together? 

克：不要那么快回答！我在问你一件非同寻常的事情。从时间之初，人类就试图处理他所有的问题，要么通过超越它们，解决它们，克服他们或者逃避它们。请不要以为你能如此轻易地把这一切推在一边，简简单单地说句话就完了。这恰恰构成了每个人头脑的结构。现在头脑能不能，不通过语言地理解这一切，把自己从传统中真正地解脱出来？处理冲突的这种传统方式永远无法解决冲突，只会增加更多的冲突：暴力着，也就是冲突着，我试图变得不暴力，这就额外增加了更多的冲突。所有的社会道德和所有的宗教对治方法都是如此。我们是在一起的吗？

     Questioner: Yes. 

发问者：是的。

     Krishnamurti: Then do you see how far we have come? Having, through understanding, repudiated all these traditional approaches, what is the actual state of the mind now? Because the state of the mind is far more important than the conflict itself. 

克：那你有没有看到我们走了多远？通过了解，否定了所有这些传统的方式，现在头脑的实际状态是怎样的？因为头脑的状态比冲突本身重要多了。

     Questioner: I really don't know. 

发问者：我真的不知道。

     Krishnamurti: Why don't you know? Why aren't you aware, if you have really abandoned the traditional approach, of the state of your mind? Why don't you know? Either you have abandoned it or you haven't. If you have, you would know it. If you have, then your mind is made innocent to look at the problem. You can look at the problem as though for the first time. And if you do this, is there a problem of conflict at all? Because you look at the problem with the old eyes it is not only strengthened but also moves in its well-worn path. So what is important is how you look at the problem - whether you look at it with new eyes or old eyes. The new eyes are freed from the conditioned responses to the problem. Even to name the problem through recognition is to approach it in the traditional way. Justification, condemnation, or translation of the problem in terms of pleasure and pain, are all involved in this habitual traditional approach of doing something about it. This is generally called positive action with regard to the problem. But when the mind brushes all that aside as being ineffectual, unintelligent, then it has become highly sensitive, highly ordered, and free. 

克：你为什么不知道？如果你真的已经抛弃了传统的方式，你为什么不知道你头脑的状态？你为什么不知道？要么你抛弃了传统方式，要么你没有。如果你已经抛弃了它，你就会知道。如果你做到了，那么你的头脑就可以纯真地看问题了。你就能像第一次看到这个问题一样。如果你做到了这点，难道还会有冲突的问题吗？因为如果你用过去的眼光看问题的话，就不只是加重了问题，而且还会重蹈覆辙。所以重要的是如何看问题――你是用新的眼光还是过去的眼光看着它。新的眼光就从对问题局限的反应中解脱出来了。即使通过认知来给问题命名，也还是在用传统的方式在处理问题。辩解，谴责，或者通过欢愉和痛苦来诠释，都包含在了这种习惯性的要对它做点什么的传统方式里。这通常被称为对于问题采取的积极行动。但是当头脑把这一切当作无效的和不智慧的扫在一边，那么它就变得高度敏感，高度有序和自由了。

     Questioner: You're asking too much of me, I can't do it. I'm incapable of it. You're asking me to be superhuman! 

发问者：你对我要求太高了，我做不到。我没有这个能力。你在让我做个超人！

     Krishnamurti: You're making difficulties for yourself, blocking yourself, when you say you must become superhuman. It's nothing of the kind. You keep on looking at things with eyes that want to interfere, that want to do something about what they see. Stop doing anything about it, for whatever you do belongs to the traditional approach. That's all. Be simple. This is the miracle of perception - to perceive with a heart and mind that are completely cleansed of the past. Negation is the most positive action.

克：当你说你必须变成超人，你是在为自己制造困难，为自己制造障碍。完全不是这样的。你一直用想要干涉的双眼看事情，想要对它们看到的东西做点什么。停止对它做任何事情，因为无论你做什么，都属于传统的方式。就是这样。简单点。这就是觉察的奇迹――用完全清除了过去的心灵和头脑去觉察。否定是最积极的行动。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'THE RELIGIOUS LIFE'
《转变的紧迫性》之“宗教性的生活”

     Questioner: I should like to know what a religious life is. I have stayed in monasteries for several months, meditated, led a disciplined life, read a great deal. I've been to various temples, churches and mosques. I've tried to lead a very simple, harmless life, trying not to hurt people or animals. This surely isn't all there is to a religious life. I've practised yoga, studied Zen and followed many religious disciples. I am, and have always been, a vegetarian. As you see, I'm getting old now, and I've lived with some of the saints in different parts of the world, but somehow I feel that all this is only the outskirts of the real thing. So I wonder if we can discuss today what to you is a religious life. 

发问者：我想问问宗教性的生活是怎样的。我在修道院里待过几个月，冥想，过一种持戒的生活，读很多书。我去过各种寺庙，教堂和清真寺。我努力过一种非常简单、无害的生活，努力不去伤害人们或者动物。对于一种宗教性的生活来说，这当然不是全部。我练过瑜伽，学过禅修，遵循过很多宗教戒律。我是个素食主义者，一直都是。就像你看到的，我现在年纪越来越大，我跟世界上不同地方的一些圣人一起生活过，但是或多或少我总感觉到这只是那真实之物的外围。所以，如果我们今天能讨论这一点的话，我想知道对你来说，怎样才是一种宗教性的生活。

     Krishnamurti: A sannyasi came to see me one day and he was sad. He said he had taken a vow of celibacy and left the world to become a mendicant, wandering from village to village, but his sexual desires were so imperious that one morning he decided to have his sexual organs surgically removed. For many months he was in constant pain, but somehow it healed, and after many years he fully realized what he had done. And so he came to see me and in that little room he asked me what he could do now, having mutilated himself, to become normal again - not physically, of course, but inwardly. He had done this thing because sexual activity was considered contrary to a religious life. It was considered mundane, belonging to the world of pleasure, which a real sannyasi must at all costs avoid. He said, "Here I am, feeling completely lost, deprived of my manhood. I struggled so hard against my sexual desires, trying to control them, and ultimately this terrible thing took place. Now what am I to do? I know that what I did was wrong. My energy has almost gone and I seem to be ending my life in darkness." He held my hand, and we sat silently for some time. 

克：一天有个遁世者来见我，他很悲哀。他说他曾经宣誓过独身生活，并离开了俗世成为了一个托钵僧，从一个村落到一个村落地流浪，但是他的性欲是那么强烈，以致于有一天早上他决定通过手术把他的性器官切除掉。好几个月他都处于持续的痛苦中，但是不管怎样还是痊愈了，在很多年之后，他才完全意识到自己做了什么。于是他来见我，在那个小房间里，他问我他现在能怎么办，他残害了自己，要怎样才能再变得正常――当然，不是生理上的，而是内在的正常。他做了这件事，是因为性行为被认为是和宗教生活相悖的。它被认为是世俗的，属于欲乐的范畴，而这是一个真正的隐士必须不惜一切代价避免的。他说，“我成了现在这个样子，感到完全地迷失了，我的男子气被剥夺了。我与我的性欲苦苦斗争，努力去控制它们，最终发生了这件可怕的事情。现在我该怎么办？我知道我做错了。我的精力几乎都消失了，我似乎要在黑暗中结束我的生命了。”他握住我的手，我们静静地坐了一会儿。

     Is this a religious life? Is the denial of pleasure or beauty a way that leads to a religious life? To deny the beauty of the skies and the hills and the human form, will that lead to a religious life? But that is what most saints and monks believe. They torture themselves in that belief. Can a tortured, twisted, distorted mind ever find what is a religious life? Yet all religions assert that the only way to reality or to God, or whatever they call it, is through this torture, this distortion. They all make the distinction between what they call a spiritual or religious life and what they call a worldly life. 

这就是宗教性的生活吗？对欢愉或者美的拒绝是通向宗教生活的道路吗？拒绝天空、群山和人类形体的美，这会通向宗教性的生活吗？但是这就是多数圣人和僧人们所相信的。他们在那个信仰中折磨着自己。一个备受折磨的、变态的、扭曲的心灵能够发现什么是宗教性的生活吗？然而所有的宗教都坚称，要通向真相或者通向神，或者不管他们管它叫什么，唯一的道路就是通过这种折磨，这种扭曲。在他们所谓的灵性生活或者宗教生活，与所谓的世俗生活之间，他们都做了这种划分。

     A man who lives only for pleasure, with occasional flashes of sorrow and piety, whose whole life is given to amusement and entertainment is, of course, a worldly man, although he may also be very clever, very scholarly, and fill his life with other people's thoughts or his own. And a man who has a gift and exercises it for the benefit of society, or for his own pleasure, and who achieves fame in the fulfilment of that gift, such a man, surely, is also worldly. But it is also worldly to go to church, or to the temple or the mosque, to pray, steeped in prejudice, bigotry, utterly unaware of the brutality that this implies. It is worldly to be patriotic, nationalistic, idealistic. The man who shuts himself up in a monastery - getting up at regular hours with a book in hand, reading and praying - is surely also worldly. And the man who goes out to do good works, whether he is a social reformer or a missionary, is just like the politician in his concern with the world. The division between the religious life and the world is the very essence of worldliness. The minds of all these people - monks, saints, reformers - are not very different from the minds of those who are only concerned with the things that give pleasure. 

一个只为了欢愉而活的人，偶尔有些悲伤或者虔诚的火花，整个生命都付诸享受和娱乐，当然，他是个世俗的人，尽管他也许非常聪明，非常博学，用别人的思想或者自己的思想塞满他的生活。而一个有天份的人，为了社会的利益或者为了自己快乐去运用这种天份，并且因此获得了名声，这样一个人，当然也是世俗的。但是，去教堂，去寺庙或者清真寺，祈祷，沉浸于偏见、偏执之中，对其中隐含的残酷毫无察觉，这也是世俗的。爱国主义，民族主义，理想主义，都是世俗的。一个把自己关进修道院的人――固定时间起床，手里拿本书，诵读，祈祷――当然也是世俗的。而一个出去做所谓善举的人，不管他是个社会改革家还是个传教士，就跟以自己的方式关注世界的政客一样。宗教生活和世俗生活之间的划分，本身就是世俗的最核心。所有这些人的头脑――僧侣，圣人，改革者――与那些只关注能带来快乐的事情的人们，没有多少不同。

     So it is important not to divide life into the worldly and the non-worldly. It is important not to make the distinction between the worldly and the so-called religious. Without the world of matter, the material world, we wouldn't be here. Without the beauty of the sky and the single tree on the hill, without that woman going by and that man riding the horse, life wouldn't be possible. We are concerned with the totality of life not a particular part of it which is considered religious in opposition to the rest. So one begins to see that a religious life is concerned with the whole and not with the particular. 

所以，不把生活划分成世俗的和非世俗的，这很重要。重要的是不在世俗的和所谓宗教的生活之间进行区分。如果没有物质的世界，这个物质世界，那么我们就不会在这里。没有天空和山上那棵孤树的美，没有那个路过的女人和那个骑马的男人，生命就是不可能的。我们关心的是生命的整体，不是其中一个特定的部分，一个被认为与其他相反的所谓宗教部分。所以一个人开始看到，具有宗教情怀的生活是对整体而不是局部的关注。

     Questioner: I understand what you say. We have to deal with the totality of living; we can't separate the world from the so-called spirit. So the question is: in what way can we act religiously with regard to all the things in life? 

发问者：我理解你说的话。我们得面对生活的整体；我们不能把这个世界与所谓的精神世界分离开来。所以问题是：对于生活中的所有事情，我们要以何种方式来行动，宗教性地行动？

     Krishnamurti: What do we mean by acting religiously? Don't you mean a way of life in which there is no division - division between the worldly and the religious, between what should be and what shouldn't be, between me and you, between like and dislike? This division is conflict. A life of conflict is not a religious life. A religious life is only possible when we deeply understand conflict. This understanding is intelligence. It is this intelligence that acts rightly. What most people call intelligence is merely deftness in some technical activity, or cunning in business or political chicanery. 

克：我们说的宗教性地行动是什么意思？你难道不是说一种没有分裂的生活方式吗――没有世俗和宗教之间的划分，应该如何和不该如何之间的划分，你和我之间的划分，喜欢和不喜欢之间的划分？这种分别就是冲突。冲突的生活不是宗教性的生活。只有当我们深刻地理解了冲突，宗教性的生活才成为可能。这种了解就是智慧。是这种智慧在正确地行动。多数人们说的智慧，只是在某种灵巧的技术行为，或者在商业中的狡猾或政治伎俩。

     Questioner: So my question really means how is one to live without conflict, and bring about that feeling of true sanctity which is not simply emotional piety conditioned by some religious cage - no matter how old and venerated that cage is? 

发问者：所以我的问题真正的意思是，一个人要怎样没有冲突地活着，带来那种真正神圣的感觉，而不只是被某种宗教牢笼禁锢的情绪化的虔诚――不管那个牢笼有多么古老和崇高？

     Krishnamurti: A man living without too much conflict in a village, or dreaming in a cave on a "sacred" hillside, is surely not living the religious life that we are talking about. To end conflict is one of the most complex things. It needs self-observation and the sensitivity of awareness of the outer as well as of the inner. Conflict can only end where there is the understanding of the contradiction in oneself. This contradiction will always exist if there is no freedom from the known, which is the past. Freedom from the past means living in the now which is not of time, in which there is only this movement of freedom, untouched by the past, by the known. 

克：一个生活在村子里没有多少冲突的人，或者在一个“神圣”的山边发梦的人，过的当然不是我们正在讨论的那种宗教生活。终结冲突时最复杂的事情之一。这需要自我观察，需要对外在以及内在灵敏的觉察。只有当了解了自身的矛盾时，冲突才能终止。如果没有从已知也就是过去中解脱出来，这种矛盾就永远都会存在。从过去中解脱意味着活在现在，现在是没有时间的，其中只有这种自由的运动，没有被过去和已知损害和污染。

     Questioner: What do you mean by freedom from the past? 

发问者：你说的从过去中解脱出来是什么意思？

     Krishnamurti: The past is all our accumulated memories. These memories act in the present and create our hopes and fears of the future. These hopes and fears are the psychological future: without them there is no future. So the present is the action of the past, and the mind is this movement of the past. The past acting in the present creates what we call the future. This response of the past is involuntary, it is not summoned or invited, it is upon us before we know it. 

克：过去是我们积累的所有记忆。这些记忆现在运作着，制造出了我们对未来的希望和恐惧。这些希望和恐惧是心理上的未来：没有它们，就没有未来。所以现在是过去的运作，心智就是过去延伸到现在的这种运动。过去在现在运作着，制造出了我们所谓的未来。这种过去的反应是无意间作出的，不是被命令或者邀请的，在我们知道这点之前就已经发生在我们身上了。

     Questioner: In that case, how are we going to be free of it? 

发问者：这样的话，我们要怎样才能从中解脱？

     Krishnamurti: To be aware of this movement without choice - because choice again is more of this same movement of the past - is to observe the past in action: such observation is not a movement of the past. To observe without the image of thought is action in which the past has ended. To observe the tree without thought is action without the past. To observe the action of the past is again action without the past. The state of seeing is more important than what is seen. To be aware of the past in that choiceless observation is not only to act differently, but to be different. In this awareness memory acts without impediment, and efficiently. To be religious is to be so choicelessly aware that there is freedom from the known even whilst the known acts wherever it has to. 

克：无选择地觉知这种运动――因为选择又是同样的这种过去的运动――去观察在运作中的过去：这种观察就不再是过去的运动了。没有思想意象的观察，是过去终止了的行动。不带念头地观察那棵树，就是没有过去的行动。观察过去的运作，也是没有过去的行动。看的状态比看到了什么重要多了。在无选择的观察中觉察过去，不仅仅是在以不同的方式行动了，而且是在以不同的方式活着了。在这种觉察中，记忆没有障碍地，高效地运作着。宗教性，就是无选择地觉察，那里有从已知中的解脱，即使其间已知还在做着不得不做的事情。

     Questioner: But the known, the past, still sometimes acts even when it should not; it still acts to cause conflict. 

发问者：但是已知，过去，有时候还在不应该的时候运作着；它的行动还是会带来冲突。

     Krishnamurti: To be aware of this is also to be in a state of inaction with regard to the past which is acting. So freedom from the known is truly the religious life. That doesn't mean to wipe out the known but to enter a different dimension altogether from which the known is observed. This action of seeing choicelessly is the action of love. The religious life is this action, and all living is this action, and the religious mind is this action. So religion, and the mind, and life, and love, are one.

克：觉察这一点，对于正在运作着的过去，也处于一种不作为的状态。所以从已知中解脱是真正宗教性的生活。无选择地看，这种行动，就是爱的行动。宗教性的生活，是这种行动，整个生活都是这种行为，宗教性的心灵就是这种行动。所以，宗教，心智，生活，和爱，是一体的。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'SEEING THE WHOLE'
《转变的紧迫性》之“看到整体”

     Questioner: When I listen to you I seem to understand what you are talking about, not only verbally, but at a much deeper level. I am part of it; I fully grasp with my whole being the truth of what you say. My hearing is sharpened, and the very seeing of the flowers, the trees, and those mountains with snow, makes me feel I am part of them. In this awareness I have no conflict, no contradiction. It is as though I could do anything, and that whatever I did would be true, would not bring either conflict or pain. But unfortunately that state doesn't last. Perhaps it lasts for an hour or two while I'm listening to you. When I leave the talks it all seems to evaporate and I'm back where I was. I try to be aware of myself; I keep remembering the state I was in when I listened to your talks, keep trying to reach it, hold on to it, and this becomes a struggle. You have said, "Be aware of your conflict, listen to your conflict, see the causes of your conflict, your conflict is yourself". I am aware of my conflict, my pain, my sorrow, my confusion, but this awareness in no way resolves these things. On the contrary, being aware of them seems to give them vitality and duration. You talk of choiceless awareness, which again breeds another battle in me, for I am full of choice, decisions and opinions. I have applied this awareness to a particular habit I have, and it has not gone. When you are aware of some conflict or strain, this same awareness keeps looking to see if it has already gone. And this seems to remind you of it, and you never shake it off. 

发问者：当我听你演讲的时候，我似乎能理解你所说的内容，不只从字面上能理解，而且能在更深的层次上理解。我已经融入其中；我以我的整个存在充分领会了你所说的真相。我的听觉敏锐了，看到花朵、树木与那些积雪的山脉，就让我感觉我是它们的一部分。在这份觉察之中，我没有冲突，没有矛盾。好像我可以做任何事情，我不论做什么，都是正确的，都不会带来冲突与痛苦。但是很不幸，这种状态无法持续。或许在听你演讲的时候，能持续一两个小时。在我离开演讲时，那状态似乎就全都蒸发掉了，我又回到了原来的样子。我努力地觉察自己，不断回想我在听你演讲时的状态，一直努力再进入并保持那种状态，于是这就变成了一种挣扎。你曾经说过，“觉知你的冲突，聆听你的冲突，认清你冲突的原因，你的冲突就是你自己。”我知道自己的冲突、痛苦、悲伤和困惑，但是这份觉察并没有解决这些问题。相反地，这种觉知反而给它们赋予了生命力和持久性。你还谈到毫无选择地觉察，这又滋生了我内心的另一种冲突，因为我的心中充满了选择、决断及观点。我曾把这份觉察应用于自己的某个特殊习惯，可是那习惯并没有因此消失。当你觉察到某种冲突或压力时，那觉察同样会一直注意看它是不是已经消失了。这似乎总在提醒你那冲突的存在，这么一来你就永远无法摆脱它了。

     Krishnamurti: Awareness is not a commitment to something. Awareness is an observation, both outer and inner, in which direction has stopped. You are aware, but the thing of which you are aware is not being encouraged or nourished. Awareness is not concentration on something. It is not an action of the will choosing what it will be aware of, and analysing it to bring about a certain result. When awareness is deliberately focused on a particular object, as a conflict, that is the action of will which is concentration. When you concentrate - that is, put all your energy and thought within your chosen frontiers, whether reading a book or watching your anger - then, in this exclusion, the thing you are concentrating upon is strengthened, nourished. So here we have to understand the nature of awareness: We have to understand what we are talking about when we use the word awareness. Now, you can either be aware of a particular thing, or be aware of that particular as part of the total. The particular by itself has very little meaning, but when you see the total, then that particular has a relationship to the whole. Only in this relationship does the particular have its right meaning; it doesn't become all-important, it is not exaggerated. So the real question is: does one see the total process of life or is one concentrated on the particular, thus missing the whole field of life? To be aware of the whole field is to see also the particular, but, at the same time, to understand its relationship to the whole. If you are angry and are concerned with ending that anger, then you focus your attention on the anger and the whole escapes you and the anger is strengthened. But anger is interrelated to the whole. So when we separate the particular from the whole, the particular breeds its own problems. 
      
克：觉察并不是对某件事情的专注。觉察是没有方向的观察，内心和外在所有的事物你都能观察到。你是觉知的，而你觉察到的东西又不会被助长或增强。觉察不是专注于某个特定的事物上。觉察不是意志力的行为，也不拣选任何觉察的对象，更不是通过分析来达到某种结果。如果刻意把觉知集中在某个特定的对象上，譬如某个冲突，那么这时的觉察就变成了意志力的行为，也就是专注。在专心的时候，也就是把你全部的精力和思想都集中在自己所选择的区域中，不管是读书还是观察自己的愤怒，如此一来，在这种排外的行为中，你就增强了、滋养了自己所专注之物。因此我们首先必须了解觉察的本质，我们得了解我们用“觉察”这个词时探讨的究竟是什么。要么你觉察的是某个特定的事物，要么觉察的是作为整体的一部分的某个特定的事物。特定的事物本身并没有什么意义，但是你如果能看到整体，特定事物就和整体产生了关系。只有在这种关系之中，特定的事物才有真正的意义；而同时又不会变得特别重要，不会被夸大。因此真正的问题就在于：我们看到的是人生的整个过程，还是专注于其中的细节，从而错过了生命的整个领域？对整个领域的觉知，也能看到细节，但同时，还能了解细节与整体的关系。假设你发怒了，而你又很想息怒，然后你把所有的注意力集中在愤怒上，这么一来你不但看不清整体，反而助长了怒气。而愤怒是和整体关联在一起的。如果你把细节从整体中分离出来，细节就会自己滋生出问题。

     Questioner: What do you mean by seeing the whole? What is this totality you talk about, this extensive awareness in which the particular is a detail? Is it some mysterious, mystical experience? If so then we are lost completely. Or is this perhaps what you are saying, that there is a whole field of existence, of which anger is a part, and that to be concerned with the part is to block out the extensive perception? But what is this extensive perception? I can only see the whole through all its particulars. And what whole do you mean? Are you talking about the whole of the mind, or the whole of existence, or the whole of myself, or the whole of life? What whole do you mean, and how can I see it? 
     Krishnamurti: The whole field of life: the mind, love, everything which is in life.

发问者：你所谓的看到整体是什么意思？你说的这个整体，在这广泛的觉知中局部只是细节而已，这整体到底是什么东西？它是不是某种神秘的、不可思议的经验？如果是的话，我们就彻底迷失了。或者你也许指的是，存在的整个领域中有个局部是愤怒，如果只关心这一小部分，就会阻碍广泛的觉知？然而广泛的觉知又是什么？只有透过所有的细节，我才能看到整体。你所谓的整体到底是什么意思？你说的是心智的整个领域，存在的整个领域，我自己的全部，还是整个生命？你说的整体是什么意思，我要如何才能看到这点?
克：我指的是生命的整个领域:包括心智、爱与生命中的所有事物。

     Questioner: How can I possibly see all that! I can understand that everything I see is partial, and that all my awareness is awareness of the particular, and that this strengthens the particular. 
     Krishnamurti: Let's put it this way: do you perceive with your mind and your heart separately, or do you see, hear, feel, think, all together, not fragmentarily? 
     Questioner: I don't know what you mean. 
     Krishnamurti: You hear a word, your mind tells you it is an insult, your feelings tell you you don't like it, your mind again intervenes to control or justify, and so on. Once again feeling takes over where the mind has concluded. In this way an event unleashes a chain-reaction of different parts of your being. What you hear had been broken up, made fragmentary, and if you concentrate on one of those fragments, you miss the total process of that hearing. Hearing can be fragmentary or it can be done with all your being, totally. So, by perception of the whole we mean perception with your eyes, your ears, your heart, your mind; not perception with each separately. It is giving your complete attention. In that attention, the particular, such as anger, has a different meaning since it is interrelated to many other issues. 

发问者：我怎么可能看得到所有的那些！我知道自己看到的都是局部，我所有的觉察也只限于特定的局部，这反而助长了局部的问题。
克：让我们换一种方式来探讨：你在觉知的时候，心智与情感是不是分开的？还是你的听觉、视觉、感觉和思想，不分割地一起并用？
发问者：我不知道你说的是什么意思。
克：假设你听到一句话，你的心智告诉你，这是一句侮辱的话，你的感觉又告诉你，你不喜欢这句话，接着你的心智又插手进来，企图控制自己或为自己辩解，等等。当心智下了一个结论，感觉又一次占了主导。如此一来，一个事件便从你的存在的不同局部引发了一连串的连锁反应。你所听到的变得支离破碎，而你如果只专注于其中的一个碎片，你就错过了整个的聆听过程。聆听可以是支离破碎的，也可以用你的整个存在完整地做到。所以我们所谓的觉察整体指的就是你的视觉、听觉、情感和心智同时并用，而不是各自分开去觉察。你付出全部的注意力。在全神贯注之下，那局部，比如愤怒，就有了不同的意义，因为它和很多其他的问题是相互关联的。

     Questioner: So when you say seeing the whole, you mean seeing with the whole of your being; it is a question of quality not quantity. Is that correct? 
     Krishnamurti: Yes, precisely. But do you see totally in this way or are you merely verbalizing it? Do you see anger with your heart, mind, ears and eyes? Or do you see anger as something unrelated to the rest of you, and therefore of great importance? When you give importance to the whole you do not forget the particular. 
     Questioner: But what happens to the particular, to anger? 
     Krishnamurti: You are aware of anger with your whole being. If you are, is there anger? Inattention is anger, not attention. So attention with your entire being is seeing the whole, and inattention is seeing the particular. To be aware of the whole, and of the particular, and of the relationship between the two, is the whole problem. We divide the particular from the rest and try to solve it. And so conflict increases and there is no way out. 

发问者：因此你所谓的看到整体，指的就是以你的整个存在去观察；这是质而不是量的问题，对不对？
克：是的，完全正确。但是你真的能这样看到全部吗？还是只说说就算了？在观察自己的愤怒时，你的视觉、听觉、心智与情感，能同时并用吗？还是你看到的愤怒是和你其他的部分无关的，因而显得特别重要？当你赋予整体重要性时，并不表示你就忽略了局部。
发问者：但是局部的愤怒又会怎么样？
克：你以你的整个存在去觉察愤怒。如果是这样，愤怒还会产生吗？粗心大意之下才会产生愤怒，全神贯注之中绝没有愤怒。以你的整个存在全神贯注就是看到整体，粗心大意则只能看到局部。觉察整体和觉察局部，以及两者之间的关系，就是整个问题。我们总是把局部和其他部分分开，然后再企图解决它。于是冲突就加深了，没有解决的出路。

     Questioner: When you speak then of seeing only the particular, as anger, do you mean looking at it with only one part of your being? 
     Krishnamurti: When you look at the particular with a fragment of your being, the division between that particular and the fragment which is looking at it grows, and so conflict increases. When there is no division there is no conflict. 
     Questioner: Are you saying that there is no division between this anger and me when I look at it with all my being? 
     Krishnamurti: Exactly. Is this what you actually are doing, or are you merely following the words? What is actually taking place? This is far more important than your question. 

发问者：你所谓的只看到局部的愤怒，你的意思是不是仅以生命的某一部分来观察愤怒？
克：如果你仅以生命的某个片段来观察那个特定的问题，那个特定的问题和正在观察它的碎片之间的距离就会拉大，如此一来冲突便增强了。假如根本没有那种距离，就不会有冲突。
发问者：你是说，我能以我的整个存在去观察愤怒，愤怒和我之间就不会产生距离？
克：一点也不错。你是真的做到了这点，还是只听听话语而已？实际发生了什么？这比你的问题重要多了。

     Questioner: You ask me what is taking place. I am simply trying to understand you. 
     Krishnamurti: Are you trying to understand me or are you seeing the truth of what we are talking about, which is independent of me? If you actually see the truth of what we are talking about, then you are your own guru and your own disciple, which is to understand yourself. This understanding cannot be learnt from another.

发问者：你问我实际发生了什么。我只是想明白你的意思罢了。
克：你是在努力地弄明白我的意思，还是你看到了我们所讨论的真相？而这真相是独立于我而存在的。如果你真的能认清我们所讨论的真相，也就是了解你自己，那么你不但是自己的老师，同时也是自己的学生。这份自我了解，你无法从别人那里学到。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'MORALITY'
《转变的紧迫性》之“道德”

     Questioner: What is it to be virtuous? What makes one act righteously? What is the foundation of morality? How do I know virtue without struggling for it? Is it an end in itself? 

发问者：什么是美德？是什么让人行为正直？道德的基础是什么？若不为之努力，我怎么能够知道美德？它本身就是个结束吗？

     Krishnamurti: Can we discard the morality of society which is really quite immoral? Its morality has become respectable, approved by religious sanctions; and the morality of counter-revolution also soon becomes as immoral and respectable as that of well-established society. This morality is to go to war, to kill, to be aggressive, to seek power, to give hate its place; it is all the cruelty and injustice of established authority. This is not moral. But can one actually say that it is not moral? Because we are part of this society, whether we are conscious of it or not. Social morality is our morality, and can we easily put it aside? The ease with which we put it aside is the sign of our morality - not the effort it costs us to put it aside, not the reward, not the punishment for this effort but the consummate ease with which we discard it. If our behaviour is directed by the environment in which we live, controlled and shaped by it, then it is mechanical and heavily conditioned. And if our behaviour is the outcome of our own conditioned response, is it moral? If your action is based on fear and reward, is it righteous? If you behave rightly according to some ideological concept or principle, can that action be regarded as virtuous? So we must begin to find out how deeply we have discarded the morality of authority, imitation, conformity and obedience. Isn't fear the basis of our morality? Unless these questions are fundamentally answered for oneself one cannot know what it is to be truly virtuous. As we said, with what ease you come out of this hypocrisy is of the greatest importance. If you merely disregard it, it doesn't indicate that you are moral: you might be merely psychopathic. If you live a life of routine and contentment that is not morality either. The morality of the saint who conforms and follows the well-established tradition of sainthood is obviously not morality. So one can see that any conformity to a pattern, whether or not it is sanctioned by tradition, is not righteous behaviour. Only out of freedom can come virtue. 

克：我们能不能抛弃社会道德？社会道德实际上非常地不道德。它的道德被宗教约束所推崇，流于体面；就像根深蒂固的社会道德一样，反革命的道德也很快变得不道德，流于体面。这种道德是去打仗，去杀戮，去侵略，追求权力，让恨大行其道；它就是当局者所有的残忍和不公。这不道德。但是你真的能说它不道德吗？因为我们就是这个社会的一部分，不管我们是否意识到了这一点。社会道德是我们的道德，我们能轻松地把它搁置一旁吗？我们把它搁置一旁的这种轻松，正体现了我们的道德――不是把它放在一边所需要花费的努力，也不是为这种努力而得到的奖赏或者惩罚，而是我们抛弃掉它所用的那种完全的轻松。如果我们的行为被我们生活在其中的环境所左右，被其控制和塑造，那么我们的行为就是机械的，严重局限的。如果我们的行为是我们自己局限反应的结果，那它是道德的吗？如果我们的行为基于恐惧和奖励，那它是正直的吗？如果你根据某种理论观念或者原则正确地行动，那行动能被认为是美德吗？所以我们必须开始去发现我们在多大程度上抛弃了权威、仿效、遵从和服从这些道德。恐惧是我们道德的基础吗？一个人无法知道什么是真正的美德，除非他自己从根本上解答了这些问题。正如我们所说，你从怎样的轻松中摆脱了这种虚伪，这是最重要的。如果你只是忽视它，那并不表明你是道德的：你可能只是精神错乱。如果你过一种例行公事心满意足的生活，那也不是道德。遵从并追随既定的圣徒传统，这些圣徒的道德，显然都不是道德。所以一个人能够看到，任何对模式的遵从，不管它是不是被传统所认可，都不是正直的行为。只有从自由中才能诞生美德。

     Can one free oneself with great skill from this network of what is considered moral? Skill in action comes with freedom, and so virtue. 
一个人能非常巧妙地把自己从被视为道德的这种网络中解脱出来吗？行动中的技巧来自于自由，美德也一样。

     Questioner: Can I free myself from social morality without fear, with the intelligence which is skill? I'm frightened at the very idea of being considered immoral by society. The young can do it, but I am middle-aged, and I have a family, and in my very blood there is respectability, the essence of the bourgeois. It is there, and I am frightened. 

发问者：我能没有恐惧地运用智慧也就是技巧把自己从社会道德中解脱出来吗？被社会视为不道德，这个念头本身就让我很害怕。年轻人能这么做，但是我已经中年了，我有个家庭，在我的血液里本身就有体面，那是资产阶级的核心品质。它就在那儿，我很害怕。

     Krishnamurti: Either you accept social morality or reject it. You can't have it both ways. You can't have one foot in hell and the other in heaven. 
克：你要么接受社会道德，要么拒绝它。你不能两边都占。你不能一只脚在地狱另一只脚在天堂。

     Questioner: So what am I to do? I see now what morality is, and yet I'm being immoral all the time. The older I grow the more hypocritical I become. I despise the social morality, and yet I want its benefits, its comfort, its security, psychological and material, and the elegance of a good address. That is my actual, deplorable state. What am I to do? 

发问者：那我该怎么办？我现在看到了道德是什么，而我始终是不道德的。年纪越大，我就变得越虚伪。我鄙视社会道德，但是我想要它的好处，它的舒适，它的安全，心理上和物质上的安全，以及有个好住址的体面。这就是我真实的可悲境地。我该怎么办？

     Krishnamurti: You can't do anything but carry on as you are. It is much better to stop trying to be moral, stop trying to be concerned with virtue. 
克：你什么也不能做，只能继续你现在的样子。停止想要变得道德，停止努力关注美德，这要好多了。

     Questioner: But I can't, I want the other! I see the beauty and the vigour of it, the cleanliness of it. What I am holding on to is dirty and ugly, but I can't let it go. 
发问者：但是我做不到，我想要另一个！我看到了它的美和生命力，它的纯净。我正抱守的东西又脏又丑，但是我丢不掉它。

     Krishnamurti: Then there is no issue. You can't have virtue and respectability. Virtue is freedom. Freedom is not an idea, a concept. When there is freedom there is attention, and only in this attention can goodness flower.

克：那就没问题了。你无法同时拥有美德和体面。美德是自由。自由不是一个想法，一个概念。有了自由就有了关注，只有在这种全神贯注中，良善才能绽放。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'SUICIDE'
《转变的紧迫性》之“自杀”

     Questioner: I would like to talk about suicide - not because of any crisis in my own life, nor because I have any reason for suicide, but because the subject is bound to come up when one sees the tragedy of old age - the tragedy of physical disintegration, the breaking up of the body, and the loss of real life in people when this happens. Is there any reason to prolong life when one reaches that state, to go on with the remnants of it? Would it not perhaps be an act of intelligence to recognise when the usefulness of life is over?

发问者：我想谈谈自杀――不是因为我自己生活中有任何危机，也不是我有任何自杀的理由，只是这个主题注定会出现在一个人面前，当他看到了生命衰老的悲剧――身体的崩溃，身体的破坏，当这悲剧发生的时候人们便失去了真正的生命。当一个人到达了这样的处境，还有任何理由延长生命，继续苟延残喘下去吗？当生命的用处已经完结时，意识到这一点难道不可以是一个智慧的行为吗？

     Krishnamurti: If it was intelligence that prompted you to end life that very intelligence would have forbidden your body to deteriorate prematurely.

克：假如是智慧在促使你结束生命，那么这个智慧本身早就应该阻止了你身体的过早退化。

     Questioner: But is there not a moment when even the intelligence of the mind cannot prevent this deterioration? Eventually the body wears out - how does one recognise that time when it comes?

发问者：但是难道没有即使是头脑的智慧也无法阻止退化的时候吗？最终身体耗损殆尽――一个人要怎样才能意识到这个时刻的来临呢？

     Krishnamurti: We ought to go into this rather deeply. There are several things involved in it, aren't there? The deterioration of the body, of the organism, the senility of the mind, and the utter incapacity that breeds resistance. We abuse the body endlessly through custom, taste and negligence. Taste dictates - and the pleasure of it controls and shapes the activity of the organism. When this takes place, the natural intelligence of the body is destroyed. In magazines one sees an extraordinary variety of food, beautifully coloured, appealing to your pleasures of taste, not to what is beneficial for the body.  So from youth onwards you gradually deaden and destroy the instrument which should be highly sensitive, active, functioning like a perfect machine.  That is part of it, and then there is the mind which for twenty, thirty or eighty years has lived in constant battle and resistance. It knows only contradiction and conflict - emotional or intellectual. Every form of conflict is not only a distortion but brings with it destruction. These then are some of the basic inner and outer factors of deterioration - the perpetually self-centred activity with its isolating processes. Naturally there is the physical wearing out of the body as well as the unnatural wearing out. The body loses its capacities and memories, and senility gradually takes over.  You ask, should not such a person commit suicide, take a pill that will put him out? Who is asking the question - the senile, or those who are watching the senility with sorrow, with despair and fear of their own deterioration?

克：关于这点，我们应该相当深入地探讨一下。其中涉及了几个问题，不是吗？身体和器官的退化，心智的衰老，这完全的无能为力滋生了抗拒。我们通过习惯、嗜好和粗心大意无休止地滥用着身体。嗜好以及它带来的快感支配、控制和塑造着有机体的活动。当这些发生的时候，身体自然的智慧就被破坏了。有人在杂志上看到了品种极其丰富的食物，色彩艳丽，吸引着你对味觉快感的诉求，而不管是否有益于你的身体。所以从年轻时起，你就在逐渐地压抑和破坏着身体这具本应像一台完美的机器一样高度敏感、活跃地运作着的仪器。那还只是一部分，还有心智，在二十年，三十年或者八十年内一直处于不间断的斗争和抗拒中。它只知道矛盾和冲突――情绪上的或者理智上的。每种形式的冲突都不仅仅是扭曲，而且还带来了破坏。而这些东西就是导致退化的内在和外在的一些基本因素――退化即是无休止的自我中心活动和自我孤立过程。自然地身体会有物理的磨损，而且也有非自然的磨损。身体失去了它的能力和记忆，年迈就逐渐接手。你问，这样一个人不应该自杀吗，吃片儿药就把他结果了？是谁在问这个问题――是年迈的人，还是正在以悲痛和绝望的心情注视着年迈，心存对自身衰老的恐惧的那些人？

     Questioner: Well, obviously the question from my point of view is motivated by distress at seeing senility in other people, for it has not presumably set in in myself yet. But isn't there also some action of intelligence which sees ahead into a possible breakdown of the body and asks the question whether it is not simply a waste to go on once the organism is no longer capable of intelligent life?

发问者：好吧，显然地从我的观点来看，那个问题是在我看到他人的年迈时候，受悲伤的驱使提出来的，因为年迈大概还没有植入我自己吧。但这其中不也是有一些智慧的行为吗？当预先看到自己的身体可能垮掉时，然后就问这样一个问题，既然有机体再也没能力去过智慧的生活了，它再继续存在下去不就纯粹是一种浪费吗？

     Krishnamurti: Will the doctors allow euthanasia, will the doctors or the government permit the patient to commit suicide?

克：医生允许安乐死吗，医生或者是政府允许病人自杀吗？

     Questioner: That surely is a legal, sociological or in some people's minds, a moral question, but that isn't what we are discussing here, is it? Aren't we asking whether the individual has the right to end his own life, not whether society will permit it?

发问者：当然这是一个法律上、社会学上的问题，或者在某些人心里，这是一个道德问题，但是我们在这里谈的不是这些，不是吗？难道我们不是在问个体是否有权结束自己的生命，而不是社会是否允许？

     Krishnamurti: You are asking whether one has the right to take one's own life - not only when one is senile or has become aware of the approach of senility, but whether it is morally right to commit suicide at any time?

克：你是问，是否一个人有权夺去自己的生命――不仅仅是当他年迈或者意识到接近了年迈的时候，而且是在任何时候进行自杀，这从道德上讲是不是正确的？

     Questioner: I hesitate to bring morality into it because that is a conditioned thing. I was attempting to ask the question on a straight issue of intelligence. Fortunately at the moment the issue does not confront me personally so I am able to look at it, I think, fairly dispassionately; but as an exercise in human intelligence, what is the answer?

发问者：我不想把道德引进来，因为道德是很局限的一件事。我想把这个问题单纯地看作是智慧的问题。幸运的是，这一刻我自己不需要面对这个问题，所以我能够看着它，我认为，是相当的冷静地看着；而把它仅仅作为人类智慧的一个练习，那答案是什么呢？

     Krishnamurti: You are saying, can an intelligent man commit suicide? Is that it?

克: 你是说，一个智慧的人会自杀吗？是这样吗？

     Questioner: Or, can suicide be the action of an intelligent man, given certain circumstances?

发问者：或者，在特定的环境下，自杀可以成为一个智者的行为吗？

     Krishnamurti: It is the same thing. Suicide comes, after all, either from complete despair, brought about through deep frustration, or from insoluble fear, or from the awareness of the meaninglessness of a certain way of living.

克：那是一回事。毕竟结果都是自杀，或者是由于完全的绝望，由于深受挫折，或者来自无法消融的恐惧，或者因为意识到了某种特定的生活方式是毫无意义的。

     Questioner: May I interrupt to say that this is generally so, but I am trying to ask the question outside any motivation. When one arrives at the point of despair then there is a tremendous motive involved and it is hard to separate the emotion from the intelligence; I am trying to stay within the realm of pure intelligence, without emotion.

发问者：我能插一句吗，情形大多确是如此，但是，我想问的问题是在所有动机之外的。当一个人濒临绝望的那一刻，其中就涉及了巨大的动机，而且很难把情感和智慧分开；我想要待在纯粹智慧的领域内，那里没有情感。

     Krishnamurti: You are saying, does intelligence allow any form of suicide? Obviously not.

克：你是说，智慧会允许任何一种形式的自杀吗？显然不会。

     Questioner: Why not?

发问者：为什么不会？

     Krishnamurti: Really one has to understand this word intelligence. Is it intelligence to allow the body to deteriorate through custom, through indulgence, through the cultivation of taste, pleasure and so on? Is that intelligence, is that the action of intelligence?

克：一个人必须要真正地理解智慧这个词。是智慧允许身体衰退的吗，通过习惯，通过沉溺，通过培养嗜好，快感等等？那是智慧吗，那是智慧的行为吗？

     Questioner: No; but if one has arrived at a point in life where there may have been a certain amount of unintelligent use of the body which has not yet had any effect on it, one can't go back and re-live one's life.

发问者：不是；但是如果一个人的生命已经那样了，他也许对身体有过某些不明智的使用，即使身体还没有感觉到任何的影响，可是他再也无法返回去重活一次了。

     Krishnamurti: Therefore, become aware of the destructive nature of the way we live and put an end to it immediately, not at some future date. The act of immediacy in front of danger is an act of sanity, of intelligence; and the postponement as well as the pursuit of pleasure indicate lack of intelligence.

克：因此，要知道我们生活方式的破坏性，并且立即结束它，而不是在将来的某一天再结束。在危险面前立即行动，是明智的，智慧的行动；推迟以及对快感的追求则显示了缺乏智慧。

     Questioner: I see that.

发问者：我知道了。

     Krishnamurti: But don't you also see something quite factual and true, that this isolating process of thought with its self-centred activity is a form of suicide? Isolation is suicide, whether it is the isolation of a nation or of a religious organization, of a family or of a community. You are already caught in that trap which will ultimately lead to suicide.

克：但是你难道没有同时看到某样特别真实和正确的事情，那就是，伴随着自我中心的行为，思想的孤立过程即是某种形式的自杀？孤立就是自杀，无论它是一个国家还是一个宗教组织的孤立，一个家庭或者一个团体的孤立。你已经落入那陷阱中了，这个陷阱最终会导致自杀。

     Questioner: Do you mean the individual or the group?

发问者：你是说一个个体还是一个团体?

     Krishnamurti: The individual as well as the group. You are already caught in the pattern.

克：是个体和团体。你已经陷入在那个模式中了。

     Questioner: Which will ultimately lead to suicide? But everybody doesn't commit suicide!

发问者：那个模式会最终导致自杀？可是并不是每个人都会自杀呀！

     Krishnamurti: Quite right, but the element of the desire to escape is already there - to escape from facing facts, from facing ''what is'', and this escape is a form of suicide.

克：没错，但是想要逃避的渴望已经作为要素存在了――逃离面对事实，逃离面对“实际状况”，这种逃避就是自杀的一种形式。

     Questioner: This, I think, is the crux of what I am trying to ask, because it would seem from what you have just said that suicide is an escape. Obviously it is, ninety-nine times out of a hundred, but can there not also be - and this is my question - can there not also be a suicide that is not an escape, that is not an avoidance of what you call the ''what is'', but is on the contrary a response of intelligence to ''what is''? One can say that many kinds of neurosis are forms of suicide; what I am trying to ask is whether suicide can ever be other than a neurotic response? Cannot it also be the response of facing a fact, of human intelligence acting on an untenable human condition?

发问者：这个，我想，就是我正设法询问的症结，因为从你刚才所说的看起来，自杀就是逃避。显然是的，99%都是，但是难道就不能有――这即是我的问题――难道就不能有一种自杀不是逃避，不是避免你所谓的“实际状况”，而正相反，是智慧应对“实际状况”的反应？可以说自杀的形式多数都是各种神经症；我想问的是，是否自杀可以不是神经质的反应？它就不能是面对事实的反应吗，不能是人的智慧对一种不堪一击的人类处境所做的反应吗？

     Krishnamurti: When you use the words ''intelligence'' and "untenable condition" it is a contradiction. The two are in contradiction.

克：当你用“智慧”和“不堪一击的处境”这些词的时候，这本身就是一种矛盾。这两者是矛盾的。

     Questioner: You have said that if one is facing a precipice, or a deadly snake about to strike, intelligence dictates a certain action, which is an action of avoidance.

发问者：你已经说过了，当一个人面对一个悬崖，或者一条致命的毒蛇就要攻击的时候，智慧支配了某种行动，那种行动就是躲避。

     Krishnamurti: Is it an action of avoidance or an act of intelligence?

克：这是一个逃避的行为还是一个智慧的行为？

     Questioner: Can they not be the same sometimes? If a car comes at me on the highway and I avoid it...

发问者：难道在某个时候它们就不能一样吗？如果公路上一辆车朝我奔来我就躲开它...

     Krishnamurti: That is an act of intelligence.

克:那是一个智慧的行为。

     Questioner: But it is also an act of avoiding the car.

发问者：但同时也是躲避车的行为。

     Krishnamurti: But that is the act of intelligence.

克：但那是一个智慧的行为。

     Questioner: Exactly. Therefore, is there not a corollary in living when the thing confronting you is insoluble and deadly?

发问者：确实。因此，当你在生活中所面对的某件事情是无法解决以及致命的，就不能有同样的一个结果吗?

     Krishnamurti: Then you leave it, as you leave the precipice: step away from it.

克：那你就离开它，就像离开那个悬崖：远离它。

     Questioner: In that case the stepping away implies suicide.

发问者：如果那样的话远离就意味着自杀。

     Krishnamurti: No, the suicide is an act of unintelligence.

克：不是，自杀是一种不明智的行为。

     Questioner: Why?

发问者：为什么？

     Krishnamurti: I am showing it to you.

克：我正把它展示给你。

     Questioner: Are you saying that an act of suicide is categorically, inevitably, a neurotic response to life?

发问者：你是说自杀的行为毫无例外地、不可避免地是一种对生活的神经质反应?

     Krishnamurti: Obviously. It is an act of unintelligence; it is an act which obviously means you have come to a point where you are so completely isolated that you don't see any way out.

克：显然是。它是一种不明智的行为；这种行为显然意味着你已经走到了完全孤立的境地以至于你看不到任何的出路。

     Questioner: But I am trying for the purpose of this discussion to assume that there is no way out of the predicament, that one is not acting out of the motive of avoidance of suffering, that it is not stepping aside from reality.

发问者：但是我想讨论的目的就是假设没有任何出路摆脱困境，人的行为并不是出于躲避受苦的动机，不是避开事实。

     Krishnamurti: Is there in life an occurrence, a relationship, an incident from which you cannot step aside?

克：生活中有这样的事，有某种关系，某个意外是你无法躲开的吗？

     Questioner: Of course, there are many.

发问者：当然，有很多。

     Krishnamurti: Many? But why do you insist that suicide is the only way out?

克：很多？但是为什么你坚持自杀是唯一的出路？

     Questioner: If one has a deadly disease there is no escaping it.

发问者：如果有人得了绝症就没办法逃避了。

     Krishnamurti: Be careful now, be careful of what we are saying. If I have cancer, and it is going to finish me, and the doctor says, ''Well, my friend, you have got to live with it'', what am I to do - commit suicide?

克：现在注意了，注意你说的话。如果我得了癌症，它将结束我的生命，医生说，“好吧，我的朋友，你必须要和它一起生活了”，那么我会做什么――自杀？

     Questioner: Possibly.

发问者：有可能。

     Krishnamurti: We are discussing this theoretically. If I personally had terminal cancer, then I would decide, I would consider what to do. It wouldn't be a theoretical question. I would then find out what was the most intelligent thing to do.

克：我们是从理论上谈论这件事。如果我个人得了晚期癌症，那么我就会决定，我会考虑一下去做什么。它不会是一个理论问题。我那时会找出最具智慧的事去做。

     Questioner: Are you saying that I may not ask this question theoretically, but only if I am actually in that position?

发问者：你是说我不应该从理论上问这个问题，除非我真的处于那种境地?

     Krishnamurti: That is right. Then you will act according to your conditioning, according to your intelligence, according to your way of life. If your way of life has been avoidance and escape, a neurotic business, then obviously you take a neurotic attitude and action. But if you have led a life of real intelligence, in the total meaning of that word, then that intelligence will operate when there is terminal cancer. Then I may put up with it; then I may say that I will live the few more months or years left to me.

克：没错。那时你就会根据你的局限，依据你的智慧，依据你的生活方式做出反应。如果你的生活方式就是逃避和逃跑，神经质之类的，那么显然你就会采取神经质的态度和行为。但是如果你过着真正智慧的生活，活出了那个词全部含义，那么当得了晚期癌症的时候智慧就会运作。那时我也许会接纳它；那时我也许会说我会在好好度过留给我的最后几个月或者几年。

     Questioner: Or you may not say that.

发问者：或者也许你不会那样说。

     Krishnamurti: Or I may not say that; but don't let us say that suicide is inevitable.

克：也许我不会那样说；但是我们也不要说自杀是不可避免的。

     Questioner: I never said that; I asked if under certain stringent circumstances, such as terminal cancer, suicide could possibly be an intelligent response to the situation.

发问者：我从来没那样说；我是问如果在特定的迫切环境下，例如晚期癌症，自杀也许会是一种针对那种状况的智慧的反应。

     Krishnamurti: You see, there is something extraordinary in this; life has brought you great happiness, life has brought you extraordinary beauty, life has brought you great benefits, and you went with it all. Equally, when you were unhappy you went with it, which is part of intelligence: now you come to terminal cancer and you say, ''I cannot bear it any longer, I must put an end to life.'' Why don't you move with it, live with it, find out about it as you go along?

克：你看，这其中有一种非凡的东西；生活带给你巨大的快乐，生活带给你非凡的美，生活带给你巨大的益处，并且你和这一切共处。同样地，当你不高兴的时候你也和它共处，这即是智慧的一部分：现在你得了晚期癌症，然后你说，“我再也无法忍受了，我必须要结束生命。”为什么你不能和它共进，与它一起生活，并在前进中了解它？

     Questioner: In other words, there is no reply to this question until you are in the situation.

发问者：换言之，你无法回答这个问题，除非你就处在那种状况中。

     Krishnamurti: Obviously. But you see that is why it is very important, I feel, that we should face the fact, face ''what is'', from moment to moment, not theorize about it. If someone is ill, desperately ill with cancer, or has become completely senile - what is the most intelligent thing to do, not for a mere observer like me, but for the doctor, the wife or the daughter?

克：显然如此。但你知道那就是为何这个问题很重要，我觉得，我们应该面对事实，面对“实际状况”，一刻接着一刻地，而不是将它理论化。如果某人病了，绝望地得了癌症，或者已经彻底衰老――什么才是最智慧的行动？这并不是仅仅像我这样的旁观者需要回答的问题，它同样也需要医生、妻子和女儿来面对。

     Questioner: One cannot really answer that, because it is a problem for another human being.

发问者：别人并不能真正回答这个问题，因为这个问题是属于另一个人的。

     Krishnamurti: That's just it, that is just what I am saying.

克：正是如此，这就是我所说的。

     Questioner: And one hasn't the right, it would seem to me, to decide about the life or death of another human being.

发问者：并且别人并没有权力，这其中也包括我，来决定另一个人的生死。

     Krishnamurti: But we do. All the tyrannies do. And tradition does; tradition says you must live this way, you mustn't live that way.

克：但我们却这么做了。所有的暴政都这么做了。传统也这么做；传统总是告诉你们必须如此生活，你们不能那样生活。

     Questioner: And it is also becoming a tradition to keep people alive beyond the point where nature would have given in. Through medical skill people are kept alive - well, it's hard to define what is a natural condition - but it seems most unnatural to survive for as long as many people do today. But that is a different question.

发问者：还有当依循自然规律应该放弃生命时，使人继续活下去也成为了一项传统。通过医学技术让人们继续存活下去――当然，也很难定义什么是自然状态――但现在很多人活了那么久，这看起来似乎也极其不自然。但那是另外一个问题。

     Krishnamurti: Yes, an entirely different question. The real question is, will intelligence allow suicide - even though doctors have said one has an incurable disease? One cannot possibly tell another what to do in this matter. It is for the human being who has the incurable disease to act according to his intelligence. If he is at all intelligent - which means that he has lived a life in which there has been love, care, sensitivity and gentleness - then such a person, at the moment when it arises, will act according to the intelligence which has operated in the past.

克：是的，这是个完全不同的问题。真正的问题是，智慧会允许自杀存在吗――尽管医生说某人得了不治之症？在这件事情上，一个人并不能告诉另一个人该如何做。这需要得了不治之症的当事人自己依智慧去处理。如果他确实是智慧的――这意味着他生活中充满了爱、关怀、敏感以及温柔――那么这样的人，在事情发生的时候，将会根据过去一直运作着的智慧来行动。

     Questioner: Then this whole conversation is in a way meaningless because that is what would have happened anyway - because people would inevitably act according to what has happened in the past. They will either blow their brains out or sit and suffer until they die, or something in between.

发问者：那么这整个谈话从某种意义上说就毫无价值，因为无论怎样，事情还是会照样发生――因为人们必然会根据过去的习性来行动。他们要么用枪把自己脑袋打开花，要么受着苦坐等死亡，要么用个折中的办法。

     Krishnamurti: No, it hasn't been meaningless. Listen to this; we have discovered several things - primarily that to live with intelligence is the most important thing. To live a way of life which is supremely intelligent demands an extraordinary alertness of mind and body, and we've destroyed the alertness of the body by unnatural ways of living. We are also destroying the mind, the brain, through conflict, through constant repression, constant explosion and violence. So if one lives a way of life that is a negation of all this, then that life, that intelligence, when confronted with incurable disease will act in the moment rightly.

克：不，这并非没有意义。听着，我们已经发现了几件事情――首先智慧地生活是最重要的事情。过一种极其智慧的生活，需要对心智和身体都有一种非凡的敏锐，而我们已经用不自然的生活方式，破坏了这种身体的敏锐。我们也正在通过冲突，通过不断的压抑，不断的爆发和暴力，破坏我们的心智和头脑。所以如果一个人能否定这一切，以一种截然不同的方式生活，那么在面对不治之症时，那生活，那智慧，将会马上恰当地运作起来。

     Questioner: I see that I have asked you a question about suicide and have been given an answer on how to live rightly.

发问者：我发现我问了你一个关于自杀的问题，但得到的是一个如何正确生存的答案。

     Krishnamurti: It is the only way. A man jumping over the bridge doesn't ask, ''Shall I commit suicide? '' He is doing it; it is finished. Whereas we, sitting in a safe house or in a laboratory, asking whether a man should or should not commit suicide, has no meaning.

克：这是唯一的出路。当一个人从桥上跳下时他不会问：“我应该自杀吗？”他这么做了；一切都结束了。而我们，坐在安全的房子里或实验室里，问一个人应该还是不应该自杀，这毫无意义。

     Questioner: So it is a question one cannot ask.
发问者：所以不能问这个问题。

     Krishnamurti: No, it must be asked - whether one should or should not commit suicide. It must be asked, but find out what is behind the question, what is prompting the questioner, what is making him want to commit suicide. We know a man who has never committed suicide, although he is always threatening to do so, because he is completely lazy. He doesn't want to do a thing, he wants everybody to support him; such a man has already committed suicide. The man who is obstinate, suspicious, greedy for power and position, has also inwardly committed suicide. He lives behind a wall of images. So any man who lives with an image of himself, of his environment, his ecology, his political power or religion, is already finished.

克：不，必须问这个问题――人应该还是不应该自杀。必须要问，但是要发现问题背后是什么，是什么促使提问者问了这个问题，是什么使他想自杀。我们认识一个人，尽管他一直威胁说要自杀，但是却从来不曾实施过，因为他太懒了。他一件事情都不想做，他只想让所有的人支持他；这样的人已经自杀了。固执的、多疑的、贪求权利和地位的人，也已经在内心中自杀了。他活在意象之墙的背后。所以，任何活在他自己、他的环境、他的领地、他的政治权力和信仰所构筑的意象里的人，已经死了。

     Questioner: It would seem to me that what you are saying is that any life that is not lived directly...
发问者：在我看来你所说的是指，任何没有直接地生活着的生活...

     Krishnamurti: Directly and intelligently.
克：直接地以及智慧地。

     Questioner: Outside the shadows of images, of conditioning, of thinking.... Unless one lives that way, one's life is a kind of low-key existence.

发问者：远离意象、局限、思想阴影地生活...除非一个人如此生活，否则他的生命就是一种压抑的存在。

     Krishnamurti: Of course it is. Look at most people; they are living behind a wall - the wall of their knowledge, their desires, their ambitious drives. They are already in a state of neurosis and that neurosis gives them a certain security, which is the security of suicide.

克：当然如此。看看大多数的人们，他们生活在一堵墙的背后――那是他们的知识、欲望、野心驱使的围墙。他们已然生活在神经质的状态下，这种神经症给他们某种安全感，一种自杀式的安全感。

     Questioner: The security of suicide!
发问者：自杀式的安全感！

     Krishnamurti: Like a singer, for example; to him the voice is the greatest security, and when that fails he is ready to commit suicide. What is really exciting and true is to find out for oneself a way of life that is highly sensitive and supremely intelligent; and this is not possible if there is fear, anxiety, greed, envy, the building of images or the living in religious isolation. That isolation is what all religions have supplied: the believer is definitely on the threshold of suicide. Because he has put all his faith in a belief, when that belief is questioned he is afraid and is ready to take on another belief, another image, commit another religious suicide. So, can a man live without any image, without any pattern, without any time-sense? I don't mean living in such a way as not to care what happens tomorrow or what happened yesterday, that is not living. There are those who say, ''Take the present and make the best of it"; that is also an act of despair. Really one should not ask whether or not it is right to commit suicide; one should ask what brings about the state of mind that has no hope - though hope is the wrong word because hope implies a future; one should ask rather, how does a life come about that is without time? To live without time is really to have this sense of great love, because love is not of time, love is not something that was or will be; to explore this and live with it is the real question. Whether to commit suicide or not is the question of a man who is already partially dead. Hope is the most dreadful thing. Wasn't it Dante who said, ''Leave hope behind when you enter the Inferno''? To him, paradise was hope, that's horrible.

克：举个例子，就像一个歌手；对他来说，嗓音是最大的安全，当失去嗓音他就想去自杀。真正激动人心和真实的事情是，自己去发现一种高度敏感和极其智慧的生活方式；可一旦有恐惧、焦虑、贪婪、嫉妒，建立意象或是生活在宗教孤立中，就不可能发现智慧的生活方式。这种孤立是所有宗教都在提供的：信仰者无疑活在自杀的阴影中。因为他把自己所有的信心投入他的信仰中，当这信仰遭到质疑时，他会害怕并准备接受另一种信仰，另一种意象，进行另一种宗教自杀。所以，一个人能不能没有意象，没有模式，没有时间感地生活？我不是指一种对于昨天和明天发生的事漠不关心的生活，那样不是生活。有些人说，“把握现在，好好珍惜”，那同样是一种绝望的行为。其实我们不该问自杀是对还是错；而应该问是什么导致我们的心智处于一种无望的状态――尽管希望是个错误的词，因为它暗含着未来；我们应该问，如何才能带来一种没有时间的生活？没有时间的生活，就是真正拥有这伟大的爱的感觉，因为爱没有时间，爱不是过去如何和将来如何；探索这点并如此生活，才是真正的问题。是否应该自杀，是已经部分死亡的人才会提出的问题。而希望是最糟糕的事情。但丁不是曾说，“当进入地狱时，请把希望留在身后”？对他来说，天堂就是希望，那太可怕了。

     Questioner: Yes, hope is its own inferno.
发问者：是的，希望就是它自身的地狱。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'DISCIPLINE'
《转变的紧迫性》之“纪律”

     Questioner: I've been brought up in a very restricted environment, in strict discipline, not only as to outward behaviour but also I was taught to discipline myself, to control my thoughts and appetites and to do certain things regularly. The result is that I find myself so hedged about that I can't do anything easily, freely and happily. When I see what is going on around me in this permissive society - the sloppiness, the dirt, the casual behaviour, the indifference to manners - I'm shocked, although at the same time I secretly desire to do some of these things myself. Discipline imposed certain values though; it brought with it frustrations and distortions, but surely some discipline is necessary - for instance, to sit decently, to eat properly, to speak with care? Without discipline one can't perceive the beauties of music or literature or painting. Good manners and training reveal a great many nuances in daily social commerce. When I observe the modern generation they have the beauty of youth, but without discipline it will soon fade away and they will become rather tiresome old men and women. There is a tragedy in all this. You see a young man, supple, eager, beautiful with clear eyes and a lovely smile, and a few years later you see him again and he is almost unrecognizable - sloppy, callous, indifferent, full of platitudes, highly respectable, hard, ugly, closed and sentimental. Surely discipline would have saved him. I, who have been disciplined almost out of existence, often wonder where the middle way is between this permissive society and the culture in which I was brought up. Isn't there a way to live without the distortion and suppression of discipline, yet to be highly disciplined within oneself? 

发问者：我在一个限制很多的环境中在严格的纪律中长大，不只有外在的行为约束，我也被教导要约束自己，控制我的思想和欲望，常规地做某些事情。这样做的结果是，我发现自己深受束缚，以致于无法轻松、自由、开心地做任何事。当我看到我周围这个悲观的世界都发生着什么――草率，污秽的言语，轻浮的行为，对礼貌的漠视――我感到震惊，尽管同时我自己私下里也想做些这样的事情。尽管纪律强加了某些价值观；它带来的是挫折和扭曲，但是某些纪律当然是必要的――例如，体面地坐着，得体地进食，关切地谈话？没有纪律，人就无法领会音乐、文学或者绘画的美。良好的教养和训练揭示出日常社会事务中许许多多的细微差别。当我观察年轻一代，他们有青春的美，但是若没有纪律，这种美很快就消退了，他们会变成相当乏味的老男人和老女人。所有这一切之中都是悲剧。你看到一个年轻人，柔韧灵活，热切，美丽，有着清澈的眼睛和可爱的笑容，但是几年后你再次见到他，几乎认不出他――邋遢，麻木，冷漠，充满老生常谈，非常体面，僵硬，丑陋，封闭，以及多愁善感。当然，纪律应该拯救了他。我几乎生来就持戒，我常常会疑惑，这个悲观的社会和我成长起来的文化之间的中间道路在哪里。难道没有一种生活方式之中没有纪律的扭曲和压抑吗，而同时一个人自己内在又非常的有纪律？

     Krishnamurti: Discipline means to learn, not to conform, not to suppress, not to imitate the pattern of what accepted authority considers noble. This is a very complex question for in it are involved several things: to learn, to be austere, to be free, to be sensitive, and to see the beauty of love. 

克：纪律意味着学习，而不是遵从，不是压抑，不是仿效公认的权威所认为的高尚模式。这是一个非常复杂的问题，因为其中涉及了几件事情：学习，简朴，自由，敏感，以及看到爱的美。

     In learning there is no accumulation. Knowledge is different from learning. Knowledge is accumulation, conclusions, formulas, but learning is a constant movement, a movement without a centre, without a beginning or an end. To learn about oneself there must be no accumulation in one's learning: if there is, it is not learning about oneself but merely adding to one's accumulated knowledge of oneself. Learning is the freedom of perception, of seeing. And you cannot learn if you are not free. So this very learning is its own discipline - you don't have to discipline yourself and then learn. Therefore discipline is freedom. This denies all conformity and control, for control is the imitation of a pattern. A pattern is suppression, suppression of "what is", and the learning about "what is" is denied when there is a formula of what is good and what is bad. The learning about "what is" is the freedom from "what is". So learning is the highest form of discipline. Learning demands intelligence and sensitivity. 

学习中没有积累。知识与学习是不同的。知识是积累，结论，模式，但是学习是一种不停的运动，没有中心的运动，没有开始或者结束。要了解自己，在了解过程中就不能有积累：如果有，那就不是了解自己了，而只是添加积累起来的关于自己的认识。学习是觉察和观看的自由。如果你不自由就无法学习。所以这学习本身就有它自己的纪律――你不用约束自己就能学习。所以纪律就是自由。这否定了所有的遵从和控制，因为控制只是仿效一种模式。模式就是压抑，对“现在如何”的压制，如果有什么是好什么是坏的模式，就对“现在如何”的了解就被否定了。了解“现在如何”，就从“现在如何”中解脱了出来。所以学习是最高形式的纪律。学习需要智慧和敏感。

     The austerity of the priest and the monk is harsh. They deny certain of their appetites but not others which custom has condoned. The saint is the triumph of harsh violence. Austerity is generally identified with self-denial through the brutality of discipline, drill and conformity. The saint is trying to break a record like the athlete. To see the falseness of this brings about its own austerity. The saint is stupid and shoddy. To see this is intelligence. Such intelligence will not go off the deep end to the opposite extreme. Intelligence is the sensitivity which understands, and therefore avoids, the extremes. But it is not the prudent mediocrity of remaining half-way between the two. To perceive all this clearly is to learn about it. To learn about it there must be freedom from all conclusions and bias. Such conclusions and bias are observation from a centre, the self, which wills and directs. 

牧师和僧侣的苦行很严苛。他们否定自己的某些欲望，不否定习俗所宽恕的另一些欲望。苦行通常被认为是通过残酷的戒律、训练和遵从进行的自我否定。圣人像运动员一样努力打破记录。看到这些的谬误，就带来了它自身的简朴。圣人是愚蠢的卑劣的。看到这一点，就是智慧。这种智慧不会走到对立的另一个深深的极端。智慧是了解进而避免极端的敏感。但智慧不是停在两个极端中间的审慎的平庸。清晰地看到这一切，就是去了解这些。要了解就必须有从所有结论和偏见中解脱出来的自由。这些结论和偏见是从一个中心，也就是自我进行的观察，自我有意志力以及方向。

     Questioner: Aren't you simply saying that to look properly you must be objective? 
发问者：你难道不就是在说要恰当地看你就必须是客观的？

     Krishnamurti: Yes, but the word objective is not enough. What we are talking about is not the harsh objectiveness of the microscope, but a state in which there is compassion, sensitivity and depth. Discipline, as we said, is learning, and learning about austerity does not bring about violence to oneself or to another. Discipline, as it is generally understood, is the act of will, which is violence. 
克：是的，但是客观这个词还不够。我们在讨论的不是显微镜这种严苛的客观，而是一种有慈悲、敏感和深度的状态。纪律，正如我们所说，是学习，对苦行的了解，并不会带来对自己或者对别人的暴力。通常所理解的纪律，是意志力的行为，也就是暴力。

     People throughout the world seem to think that freedom is the fruit of prolonged discipline. To see clearly is its own discipline. To see clearly there must be freedom, not a controlled vision. So freedom is not at the end of discipline, but the understanding of freedom is its own discipline. The two go together inseparably: when you separate them there is conflict. To overcome that conflict, the action of will comes into being and breeds more conflict. This is an endless chain. So freedom is at the beginning and not at the end: the beginning is the end. To learn about all this is its own discipline. Learning itself demands sensitivity. If you are not sensitive to yourself - to your environment, to your relationships - if you are not sensitive to what is happening round you, in the kitchen or in the world, then however much you discipline yourself you only become more and more insensitive, more and more self-centred - and this breeds innumerable problems. To learn is to be sensitive to yourself and to the world outside you, for the world outside is you. If you are sensitive to yourself you are bound to be sensitive to the world. This sensitivity is the highest form of intelligence. It is not the sensitivity of a specialist - the doctor, the scientist or the artist. Such fragmentation does not bring sensitivity. 

全世界的人们似乎都认为自由是长期守纪律的结果。看到这一点，本身就是纪律。要清楚地看到，就必须有自由，而不是某种受控的视野。所以自由不在纪律的结尾，而是，对自由的了解就是它自身的纪律。这两者不分离地并肩而行：当你把它们分开就有了冲突。要克服这冲突，就形成了意志力的行为，滋生了更多的冲突。这是个无穷无尽的链条。所以开始就要自由，而不是在结束的时候自由：开始就是结束。了解了这一切，就有了它自己的纪律。学习本身需要敏感。如果你对自己――对你的环境，对你的关系不敏感――如果你对自己周围发生的事情不敏感，不管是在厨房里还是在世界上，那么，不管你怎么约束自己，你只会变得越来越不敏感，越来越自我中心――而这滋生了无数的问题。学习就是对你自己，对你周围的世界敏感，因为外部世界就是你。如果你对自己敏感，那么你就必然会对世界敏感。这种敏感是最高形式的智慧。它不是一个专家――医生，科学家或者艺术家的敏感。这种细分无法带来敏感。

     How can one love if there is no sensitivity? Sentimentality and emotionalism deny sensitivity because they are terribly cruel; they are responsible for wars. So discipline is not the drill of the sergeant - whether in the parade-ground or in yourself - which is the will. Learning all day long, and during sleep, has its own extraordinary discipline which is as gentle as the new spring leaf and as swift as the light. In this there is love. Love has its own discipline, and the beauty of it escapes a mind that is drilled, shaped, controlled, tortured. Without such a discipline the mind cannot go very far.

如果没有敏感，一个人要如何去爱？多愁善感和感情用事否定了敏感，因为它们极其残忍；它们对战争负责。所以纪律不是士兵的操练――不管是阅兵场上的还是你自身的――这是意志力。在整个白天和睡眠中都学习，就有它自己不同寻常的纪律，那就像春天的嫩叶一样轻柔，像阳光一样迅捷。其中就有爱。爱有它自身的纪律，它的美是一个受训的、被塑造、控制和折磨的头脑所无法捕捉的。没有这样的纪律，心智永远无法走得太远。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'WHAT IS'
《转变的紧迫性》之“现在如何”

     Questioner: I have read a great deal of philosophy, psychology, religion and politics, all of which to a greater or lesser degree are concerned with human relationships. I have also read your books which all deal with thought and ideas, and somehow I'm fed up with it all. I have swum in an ocean of words, and wherever I go there are more words - and actions derived from those words are offered to me: advice, exhortations, promises, theories, analyses, remedies. Of course one sets all these aside - you yourself have really done so; but for most of those who have read you, or heard you, what you say is just words. There may be people for whom all this is more than words, for whom it is utterly real, but I'm talking about the rest of us. I'd like to go beyond the word, beyond the idea, and live in total relationship to all things. For after all, that is life. You have said that one has to be a teacher and a pupil to oneself. Can I live in the greatest simplicity, without principles, beliefs, and ideals? Can I live freely, knowing that I am enslaved by the world? Crises don't knock on the door before they appear: challenges of everyday life are there before you are aware of them. Knowing all this, having been involved in many of these things, chasing various phantoms, I ask myself how I can live rightly and with love, clarity and effortless joy. I'm not asking how to live, but to live: the how denies the actual living itself. The nobility of life is not practising nobility. 

发问者：我读了大量的哲学、心理学、宗教和政治学，这些东西或多或少都在某种程度上关注人类的关系。我也读过你的书，都着眼于思想和观念，从某种程度上说，这些我都受够了。我游弋于语言的海洋，不管我走到哪儿，都是更多的语言――从这些语言里产生的行动被提供给我：建议，规劝，承诺，理论，分析，治疗方法。当然一个人得把这些都搁置一旁――你自己就真的这么做了；但是对于那些读过你的书或者听过你演讲的多数人来说，你所说的不过是语言而已。也许有些人，对他们来说这一切不只是语言，对他们来说这些极其真实，但是我说的是另外一些人。我想要超越文字，超越观念，生活在与所有事物完整的关系中。因为，毕竟这是生活。你说过，一个人必须同时是自己的老师和学生。我能不能生活得极其简单，没有原则、信念和理想？知道我被这个世界奴役了，我能不能自由地活着？危机在出现之前是不会来敲门的：日常生活的挑战在你觉察到它们之前，就已经在那里了。知道了这一切，身处这些事情之中，追寻各种幻象，我问自己我要如何才能正确地生活，带着爱、清晰和不费力的喜悦。我问的不是如何生活，而是生活本身：这个如何就否定了真实的生活本身。生命的高贵并不是练习高贵。

     Krishnamurti: After stating all this, where are you? Do you really want to live with benediction, with love? If you do, then where is the problem? 

克：说出这一切之后，你到了哪里？你真的想带着至福带着爱生活吗？如果是的，那么问题在哪里？

     Questioner: I do want to, but that doesn't get me anywhere. I've wanted to live that way for years, but I can't. 

发问者：我真的想这样，但是这没有把我带到任何地方。多年来我一直想要这样生活，但是我做不到。

     Krishnamurti: So though you deny the ideal, the belief, the directive, you are very subtly and deviously asking the same thing which everybody asks: this is the conflict between the "what is" and the "what should be". 

克：所以尽管你否定了理想、信念、指导，但是你还在很隐蔽地拐弯抹角地问所有人都问的同一件事：这就是“现在如何”与“应当如何”之间的冲突。

     Questioner: Even without the "what should be", I see that the "what is" is hideous. To deceive myself into not seeing it would be much worse still. 

发问者：即使没有“应当如何”，我也看到了“现在如何”是丑陋的。欺骗我自己无视这一点，那更要糟糕得多。

     Krishnamurti: If you see "what is" then you see the universe, and denying "what is" is the origin of conflict. The beauty of the universe is in the "what is; and to live with "what is" without effort is virtue. 

克：如果你看到了“现在如何”，那么你就看见了宇宙，否认“现在如何”，正是冲突的根源。宇宙的美就在“现在如何”中；不费力地与“现在如何”共处就是美德。

     Questioner: The "what is" also includes confusion, violence, every form of human aberration. To live with that is what you call virtue. But isn't it callousness and insanity? Perfection doesn't consist simply in dropping all ideals! Life itself demands that I live it beautifully, like the eagle in the sky: to live the miracle of life with anything less than total beauty is unacceptable. 

发问者：“现在如何”也包含了困惑，暴力，人类各种形式的异常行为。与现在如何共处就是你所说的美德。但是它难道不是冷酷和疯狂吗？完美并不是简简单单地存在于放下所有的理想中！生活本身要求我美丽地活着，就像天空中的鹰一样：不带着完全的美活出生命的奇迹，这是不可接受的。

     Krishnamurti: Then live it! Questioner: I can't, and I don't. 

克：那么就活出来！发问者：我不能，我办不到。

     Krishnamurti: If you can't, then live in confusion; don't battle with it. Knowing the whole misery of it, live with it: that is "what is". And to live with it without conflict frees us from it. 

克：如果你不能，那就生活在困惑中；不要与它斗争。知道它所有的痛苦所在，与它共处：这就是“现在如何”。没有冲突地与之共处就把我们从中解脱了出来。

     Questioner: Are you saying that our only fault is to be self-critical? 

发问者：你是说我们唯一的错就是自我批判吗？

     Krishnamurti: Not at all. You are not sufficiently critical. You go only so far in your self-criticism. The very entity that criticizes must be criticized, must be examined. If the examination is comparative, examination by yardstick, then that yardstick is the ideal. If there is no yardstick at all - in other words, if there is no mind that is always comparing and measuring - you can observe the "what is", and then the "what is" is no longer the same. 

克：完全不是。你的批判性还不够。你仅仅止步于你的自我批判。批判的那个实体本身必须被批判，必须被审视。如果这审视是比较性的，用标准来衡量，那么那个标准就是理想。如果完全没有标准――换句话说，如果没有那个一直在比较和衡量的头脑――你就能观察到“现在如何”，那么“现在如何”就不再依然如故了。

     Questioner: I observe myself without a yardstick, and I'm still ugly. 

发问者：我不用标准来观察我自己，可我还是丑陋的。

     Krishnamurti: All examination means there is a yardstick. But is it possible to observe so that there is only observation, seeing, and nothing else - so that there is only perception without a perceiver? 

克：所有的检验都意味着有个标准。但是否可能有这样一种观察，只有观察和看到，别的什么都没有――这样就只有觉察而没有觉察者？

     Questioner: What do you mean? 

发问者：你是什么意思？

     Krishnamurti: There is looking. The assessment of the looking is interference, distortion in the looking: that is not looking; instead it is evaluation of looking - the two are as different as chalk and cheese. Is there a perception of yourself without distortion, only an absolute perception of yourself as you are? 
     Questioner: Yes. 

克：存在着观察。对观察的评估是对观察的干扰和扭曲：那不是观察；相反，那是对观察的评价――这两者的区别就像粉笔和奶酪的区别。有没有一种对你自己的觉知，其中没有扭曲，只有对你自己如实而单纯的觉察？
发问者：有的。

     Krishnamurti: In that perception is there ugliness? 
     Questioner: There is no ugliness in the perception, only in what is perceived. 

克：在那种觉察中有丑陋吗？
发问者：在那种觉察中没有丑陋，只有在觉察到的东西中才有丑陋。

     Krishnamurti: The way you perceive is what you are. Righteousness is in purely looking, which is attention without the distortion of measure and idea. You came to enquire how to live beautifully, with love. To look without distortion is love, and the action of that perception is the action of virtue. That clarity of perception will act all the time in living. That is living like the eagle in the sky; that is living beauty and living love.

克：你觉察的方式就是现在的你。正直在单纯的观察中，也就是在没有被衡量和观念扭曲的关注中。你来询问如何美丽地有爱地活着。不扭曲地观察就是爱，那觉察的行动就是美德的行动。觉知的清澈会一直在生活中运作。那就是像天空中的鹰一样的生活；那就是活生生的美和活生生的爱。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'THE SEEKER'
《转变的紧迫性》之“追寻者”

     Questioner: What is it I'm seeking? I really don't know, but there is a tremendous longing in me for something much more than comfort, pleasure and the satisfaction of fulfilment. I happen to have had all these things, but this is something much more - something at an unfathomable depth that is crying to be released, trying to tell me something. I've had this feeling for many years but when I examine it I don't seem to be able to touch it. Yet it is always there, this longing to go beyond the mountains and the skies to find something. But perhaps this thing is there right in front of me, only I don't see it. Don't tell me how to look: I've read many of your writings and I know what you mean. I want to reach out my hand and take this thing very simply, knowing very well that I cannot hold the wind in my fist. It is said that if you operate on a tumour neatly you can pluck it out in one pocket, intact. In the same way I should like to take this whole earth, the heavens and the skies and the seas in one movement, and come upon that blessedness on the instant. Is this at all possible? How am I to cross to the other shore without taking a boat and rowing across the waters? I feel that's the only way. 

发问者：我在追寻什么？我真的不知道，但是我内心有一种强烈的渴望，渴望一种远远超出舒适、快乐和成就感的东西。那些东西碰巧我都有，但我渴望的远远不只这些――在深不可测的地方有某种东西急切地想要释放出来，试图告诉我什么。多年来我一直有这种感觉，但是当我审视它时，我似乎无法触及它。但是它始终在那儿，这种想要跨越高山和天空去发现什么的渴望。但是也许这东西就在我面前，只是我看不到它。不要告诉我怎么去看：我读过你写的很多书，我知道你的意思是什么。我想要伸出我的手，轻而易举地拿到这东西，同时又很明白我无法把风握在我的拳头里。听说如果你干净利索地对一个肿瘤动手术，你能一下子就把它摘除下来，而且完好无损。同样，我想把这整个地球，天空和海洋一举拿下，即刻遭遇那天赐的幸福。这究竟可能吗？我要怎样跨到彼岸而不用乘船或者划过水面？我觉得那是唯一的途径。

     Krishnamurti: Yes, that's the only way - to find oneself strangely and unaccountably on the other shore, and from there to live, act and do everything that one does in daily life. 

克：是的，那是唯一的途径――发现自己不可思议地莫名其妙地就在彼岸了，从那里开始生活，行动，以及做日常生活中的所有事情。

     Questioner: Is it only for the few? Is it for me? I really don't know what to do. I've sat silent; I've studied, examined, disciplined myself, rather intelligently I think, and of course I've long ago discarded the temples, the shrines and the priests. I refuse to go from one system to another; it is all too futile. So you see I have come here with complete simplicity. 

发问者：只有少数人才能这样吗？我可以吗？我真的不知道该怎么办。我静坐过；我研究过，审视过，约束过我自己，我想我用的是相当明智的方式，当然我很早以前就抛弃了寺庙、神龛和牧师。我拒绝从一个体系进入另一个体系；那些都毫无意义。所以你看，我来到了这里，内心有完完全全的简单。

     Krishnamurti: I wonder if you really are so simple as you think! From what depth are you asking this question, and with what love and beauty? Can your mind and heart receive this? Are they sensitive to the slightest whisper of something that comes unexpectedly? 

克：我想知道你是否真的如你所想的那么简单！你是从怎样的深度来问出这个问题的，带着怎样的爱和美？你的头脑和心灵能接收到这些吗？它们对不期而来的极其低微的细语都很敏感吗？

     Questioner: If it is as subtle as all that, how true is it, and how real? Intimations of such subtlety are usually fleeting and unimportant. 

发问者：如果像所有那些一样微妙，那么它有多真实，多真切？这种微妙的蛛丝马迹通常转瞬即逝，并不重要。

     Krishnamurti: Are they? Must everything be written out on the blackboard? Please, sir, let us find out whether our minds and hearts are really capable of receiving immensity, and not just the word. 

克：是吗？每件事都必须写在黑板上吗？先生，请你让我们去发现我们的头脑和心灵是否真的能够接收到无限，而不仅仅是词语。

     Questioner: I really don't know, that's my problem. I've done almost everything fairly intelligently, putting aside all the obvious stupidities of nationality, organized religion, belief - this endless passage of nothings. I think I have compassion, and I think my mind can grasp the subtleties of life, but that surely is not enough? So what is needed? What have I to do or not to do? 

发问者：我真的不知道，这就是我的问题。我相当明智地做过了几乎所有事情，把所有显而易见的愚蠢的民族主义、有组织的宗教、信仰都抛在了一边――那是一条毫无意义的没有尽头的通道。我想我有慈悲，我想我的头脑能够抓住生命的微妙之处，但这显然是不够的？那么还需要什么？我必须做什么或者不做什么？

     Krishnamurti: Doing nothing is far more important than doing something. Can the mind be completely inactive, and thereby be supremely active? Love is not the activity of thought; it is not the action of good behaviour or social righteousness. As you cannot cultivate it, you can do nothing about love. 

克：什么都不做比做点什么要重要多了。头脑能不能完全不活动，因而就能极其活跃？爱不是思想的活动；爱不是善行或者社会正义的行动。因为你无法培育爱，所以对爱你什么也做不了。

     Questioner: I understand what you mean when you say that inaction is the highest form of action - which doesn't mean to do nothing. But somehow I cannot grasp it with my heart. Is it perhaps only because my heart is empty, tired of all action, that inaction seems to have an appeal? No. I come back to my original feeling that there is this thing of love, and I know, too, that it is the only thing. But my hand is still empty after I have said that. 

发问者：当你说不行动是最高形式的行动，我明白你的意思――那并不意味着什么都不做。但是在某种程度上我就是无法用我的心把握这一点。或许只是因为我的心太空了，厌倦了所有行动，那种不行动似乎就有了某种诉求？不是的。我回到了我最初的那种感觉，也就是有爱这样东西，我也知道，这是唯一的东西。但是说了这些话以后我的手还是空的。

     Krishnamurti: Does this mean that you are no longer seeking, no longer saying to yourself secretly: "I must reach, attain, there is something beyond the furthest hills?" 
     Questioner: You mean I must give up this feeling I have had for so long that there is something beyond all the hills? 

克：这是否意味着你不再追寻了，不再偷偷地对自己说：“我必须达成，取得，越过最远的山那边有某种东西？”
发问者：你的意思是我必须放弃我拥有了这么久的这种感觉，也就是越过所有山那边有某种东西的感觉？

     Krishnamurti: It is not a question of giving up anything, but, as we said just now, there are only these two things: love, and the mind that is empty of thought. If you really have finished, if you really have shut the door on all the stupidities which man in his search for something has put together, if you really have finished with all these, then, are these things - love and the empty mind - just two more words, no different from any other ideas? 

克：这不是一个放弃任何东西的问题，而是，正如我们刚才所说的，只有这两样东西：爱，和清空了思想的头脑。如果你真的完成了，如果你真的把人类在追寻过程中制造出来的所有那些愚蠢之事关在了门外的话，如果你真的完成了这一切，那么，这两样东西――爱和空寂的头脑――还仅仅是与其他观念没有区别的另两个词吗？

     Questioner: I have a deep feeling that they are not, but I am not sure of it. So again I ask what I am to do. 
     Krishnamurti: Do you know what it means to commune with what we have just said about love and the mind? 
     Questioner: Yes, I think so. 

发问者：我有种深深的感觉它们不再是词语，但是我不确定。所以我再一次问我该怎么做。
克：你知不知道就我们刚才关于爱和头脑所说的话进行交流是什么意思？
发问者：是的，我想我知道。

     Krishnamurti: I wonder if you do. If there is communion with these two things then there is nothing more to be said. If there is communion with these two things then all action will be from there. 
     Questioner: The trouble is that I still think there is something to be discovered which will put everything else in its right place, in its right order. 

克：我怀疑你是不是真的知道。如果与这两样东西有交流的话，那就没什么更多要说的了。如果与这两样东西有交流的话，那么所有的行动就会从那里开始。
发问者：问题是我还是认为有什么东西需要去发现，它会把其他的所有事情都以正确的秩序，放在正确的位置上。

     Krishnamurti: Without these two things there is no possibility of going further. And there may be no going anywhere at all! 
     Questioner: Can I be in communion with it all the time? I can see that when we are together I can be somewhat in communion with it. But can I maintain it? 
     Krishnamurti: To desire to maintain it is the noise, and therefore the losing of it.

克：没有这两样东西就没有更进一步的可能。也许根本就哪也去不了。
发问者：我能与它一直有交流吗？我发现当我们在一起时，我能在某种程度上与它交流。但是我能保持住它吗？
克：想要保持住它的愿望就是噪音，因而就失去了它。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'ORGANISATION'
《转变的紧迫性》之“组织”

Questioner: I have belonged to many organizations, religious, business and political. Obviously we must have some kind of organization; without it life couldn't continue, so I've been wondering, after listening to you, what relationship there is between freedom and organization. Where does freedom begin and organization end? What is the relationship between religious organizations and Moksha or liberation?

发问者：我曾属于很多组织，宗教的、商业的以及政治组织。显然我们必须有某些类型的组织；没有组织，生活就无法继续，所以听了你的讲话后，我一直想知道，自由和组织之间是什么关系。自由从哪里开始，组织又从哪里结束？宗教组织与解脱或者解放之间的关系是什么？

Krishnamurti: As human beings living in a very complex society, organizations are needed to communicate, to travel, to bring food, clothes and shelter, for all the business of living together whether in cities or in the country. Now this must be organized efficiently and humanely, not only for the benefit of the few but for everyone, without the divisions of nationality, race or class. This earth is ours, not yours or mine. To live happily, physically, there must be sane, rational, efficient organizations. Now there is disorder because there is division. Millions go hungry while there is vast prosperity. There are wars, conflicts and every form of brutality. Then there is the organization of belief - the organization of religions, which again breeds disunity and war. The morality which man has pursued has led to this disorder and chaos. This is the actual state of the world. And when you ask what is the relationship between organization and freedom, are you not separating freedom from everyday existence? When you separate it in this way as being something entirely different from life, isn't this, in itself, conflict and disorder? So really the question is: is it possible to live in freedom and to organize life from this freedom, in this freedom?

克：由于人类生活在一个非常复杂的社会里，需要组织来沟通，旅行，制造食物、衣服和住所，供给生活事务的方方面面，不管是在城市还是乡村。现在不仅仅是为了少数人，也是为了所有人的利益，这些事情必须高效地人道地加以组织，不划分国家、种族或者阶级。这个地球是我们的，不是你的也不是我的。在物质层面要活得快乐，必须有明智的，理性的，高效的组织。而如今存在的失序，就是因为有划分。数以百万计的人忍饥挨饿，可同时又存在着大范围的繁荣。存在着战争，冲突以及各种形式的残酷。还有信仰的组织――宗教组织，也滋生了不团结和战争。人类追求的道德导致了这些失序和混乱。这就是世界的真实状况。当你问组织和自由之间的关系是什么，你不就是把自由与每天的生存分离开了吗？当你把自由当做与生活完全不同的某种东西，把它这样分离出来时，难道这本身不就是冲突和失序吗？所以真正的问题是：是否可能生活在自由中，从这自由中，在这自由中来组织生活？

Questioner: Then there would be no problem. But the organization of life isn't made by yourself: others make it for you - the government and others send you to war or determine your job. So you cannot simply organize for yourself out of freedom. The whole point of my question is that the organization imposed on us by the government, by society, by morality, is not freedom. And if we reject it we find ourselves in the midst of a revolution, or some sociological reformation, which is a way of starting the same old cycle all over again. Inwardly and outwardly we are born into organization, which limits freedom. We either submit or revolt. We are caught in this trap. So there seems to be no question of organizing anything out of freedom.

发问者：那就没有问题了。但是生活中的组织不是你自己制造出来的：别人为你组建了出来――政府和别人把你送到战场上或者决定你的工作。所以你无法简简单单地从自由出发自己来组织。我的问题的整个重点是，由政府，由社会，由道德强加于我们的组织，不是自由。如果我们拒绝它们，我们就发现自己置身于一场革命，或者某种社会改革中了，而这只是再一次重蹈覆辙而已。不管内在还是外在，我们诞生于组织中，这限制了自由。我们要么服从要么反抗。我们被困在这个陷阱中了。所以，从自由中组织任何东西出来，这个问题似乎并不存在。

Krishnamurti: We do not realize that we have created society, this disorder, these walls; each one of us is responsible for it all. What we are, society is. Society is not different from us. If we are in conflict, avaricious, envious, fearful, we bring about such a society.

克：我们没有意识到是我们制造了这个社会，制造了这些失序，这些围墙；我们每个人都要为之负责。我们如何，社会就如何。社会与我们并无不同。如果我们处于冲突中，贪婪，嫉妒，恐惧，我们就制造出这样的一个社会。

Questioner: There is a difference between the individual and society. I am a vegetarian; society slaughters animals. I don't want to go to war; society will force me to do so. Are you telling me that this war,is my doing?

发问者：个人与社会之间是不同的。我是个素食者；社会屠杀动物。我不参战；社会却会逼迫我这么做。你难道告诉我说，这场战争是我的作为？

Krishnamurti: Yes, it's your responsibility. You have brought it about by your nationality, your greed, envy and hate. You are responsible for war as long as you have those things in your heart, as long as you belong to any nationality, creed or race. It is only those who are free of those things who can say that they have not created this society. Therefore our responsibility is to see that we change, and to help others to change, without violence and bloodshed.

克：是的，是你的责任。你是由你的国家，你的贪婪、嫉妒和仇恨培养出来的。只要你心里有这些东西，只要你属于任何国家、信条或者种族，你就要为战争负责。只有摆脱了这些东西的人，才能说他们没有创造这样一个社会。所以我们的责任是我们自己转变，并帮助别人转变，而且不通过暴力和流血。

Questioner: That means organized religion.
Krishnamurti: Certainly not. Organized religion is based on belief and authority.

发问者：那意味着组织化的宗教。
克：当然不是。组织化的宗教是基于信仰和权威的。

Questioner: Where does this get us in our original question regarding the relationship between freedom and organization? Organization is always imposed or inherited from the environment, and freedom is always from the inside, and these two clash.

发问者：我们最初的问题是关于自由和组织之间的关系的，现在这些把我们带到了哪里？组织总是外在强加的，或者从环境中继承的，而自由总是来自内在，这两者互相冲突。

Krishnamurti: Where are you going to start? You must start from freedom. Where there is freedom there is love. This freedom and love will show you when to co-operate and when not to cooperate. This is not an act of choice, because choice is the result of confusion. Love and freedom are intelligence. So what we are concerned with is not the division between organization and freedom but whether we can live in this world without division at all. It is division which denies freedom and love, not organization. When organization divides, it leads to war. Belief in any form, ideals, however noble or effective, breed division. Organized religion is the cause of division, just like nationality and powergroups. So be concerned with those things which divide, those things which bring about division between man and man, whether they be individual or collective. The family, the church, and the State bring about such division. What is important is the movement of thought which divides. Thought itself is always divisive, so all action based on an idea or an ideology is division. Thought cultivates prejudice, opinion, judgement. Man in himself, being divided, seeks freedom out of this division. Not being able to find it he hopes to integrate the various divisions, and of course this is not possible. You cannot integrate two prejudices. To live in this world in freedom means to live with love, eschewing every form of division. When there is freedom and love, then this intelligence will act in co-operation, and will also know when not to cooperate.

克：你打算从哪里开始？你必须从自由开始。有自由就有爱。这自由和爱会告诉你什么时候合作，什么时候不合作。这不是选择的行为，因为选择是困惑的结果。爱和自由就是智慧。所以我们关心的不是组织和自由之间的区分，而是我们能否完全没有分别地生活在这个世界上。是分别否定了自由和爱，而不是组织。当组织进行分别，就导致战争。任何形式的信仰、理想，不管多么高尚或者多么有效，都滋生分别。组织化的宗教是分裂的根源，就像国家和权力集团一样。所以关注这些分裂的事物，这些在人与人之间带来分别的事物，不管它们是个人的还是集体的。家庭、教会和国家制造了这些分别。重要的是分别着的思想的运动。思想本身总是分裂的，所以基于想法或者观念意识的所有行为都是分别。思想培植出偏见、观点、评判。人本身，在分别着，追求从这分别中解脱出来的自由。找不到，他就希望把各种分别整合在一起，当然这是不可能的。你无法整合两个偏见。自由地生活在这个世界上，意味着带着爱生活，避开任何形式的分别。有自由和爱，那么这种智慧就会在合作中运作，也会知道什么时候不合作。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'LOVE AND SEX'
《转变的紧迫性》之“爱与性”

     Questioner: I'm a married man with several children. I've lived rather a dissipated life in search of pleasure, but a fairly civilized life too, and I've made a success of it financially. But now I'm middle-aged and am feeling concerned, not only about my family but also about the way the world is going. I'm not given to brutality or violent feelings, and I have always considered that forgiveness and compassion are the most important things in life. Without these man becomes subhuman. So if I may I should like to ask you what love is. Is there really such a thing? Compassion must be part of it, but I always feel that love is something much vaster, and if we could explore it together perhaps I should then make my life into something worthwhile before it is too late. I have really come to ask this one thing - what is love? 

发问者：我是个有了几个孩子的已婚男人。我曾经生活得相当放纵，追求快感，但也生活得相当文明，在财务方面我很成功。但是现在我中年了，我感觉到我不只关心我的家庭，同时也关心世界运行的方式。我并没有残忍或者暴力的感觉，我始终认为宽恕和慈悲是生活中最重要的事情。没有这些，人会变得不太人道。所以，如果可以的话，我想问问你，爱是什么。真的有这个东西吗？慈悲肯定是它的一部分，但是我总是觉得爱是广阔得多的东西，如果我们能够一起探索它的话，也许在太迟之前，我能把我的生命变得有价值。我真的是来问这件事情的――爱是什么？

     Krishnamurti: Before we begin to go into this we must be very clear that the word is not the thing, the description is not the described, because any amount of explanation, however subtle and clever, will not open the heart to the immensity of love. This we must understand, and not merely stick to words: words are useful for communication, but in talking about something that is really non-verbal we must establish a communion between us, so that both of us feel and realize the same thing at the same time, with a fullness of mind and heart. Otherwise we will be playing with words. How can one approach this really very subtle thing that cannot be touched by the mind? We must go rather hesitatingly. Shall we first see what it is not, and then perhaps we may be able to see what it is? Through negation we may come upon the positive, but merely to pursue the positive leads to assumptions and conclusions which bring about division. You are asking what love is. We are saying we may come upon it when we know what it is not. Anything that brings about a division, a separation, is not love, for in that there is conflict, strife and brutality. 

克：在我们开始深入这点之前，我们必须非常清楚，语言并非它所指之物，描述并非描述之物，因为任何解释，不管多么细致多么精巧，不会把心灵向无限的爱敞开。这点我们必须明白，而且不能仅仅去攀援词语：语言对沟通来说是有用的，但是在探讨某种非语言所能表达的东西时，我们之间必须建立一种交流，这样我们两个就都能同时全心全意地感受到、意识到同一种东西。否则我们就只是在玩弄词句。一个人要怎样接近这个真的十分微妙的、头脑所无法触及的东西？我们必须小心翼翼地前进。我们能不能先看看它不是什么，然后也许我们就能看到它是什么？通过否定，我们可能会遭遇那正确之物，但是单单去追求正确的，就会导致假设和结论，这会带来分裂。你在问爱是什么。我们说，当我们知道它不是什么时，也许就能遇到它。任何带来分裂、分离的事物，都不是爱，因为其中有冲突、争斗和残忍。

     Questioner: What do you mean by a division, a separation that brings about strife - what do you mean by it? 
     Krishnamurti: Thought in its very nature is divisive. It is thought that seeks pleasure and holds it. It is thought that cultivates desire. 
     Questioner: Will you go into desire a bit more? 

发问者：你说的会带来冲突的分裂、分离是什么意思――你这么说是什么意思？
克：思想本身的性质就是分裂的。是思想在追求并紧抓快感。是思想滋生了欲望。
发问者：你能更深入地说说欲望吗？

     Krishnamurti: There is the seeing of a house, the sensation that it is lovely, then there is the desire to own it and to have pleasure from it, then there is the effort to get it. All this constitutes the centre, and this centre is the cause of division. This centre is the feeling of a "me", which is the cause of division, because this very feeling of "me" is the feeling of separation. People have called this the ego and all kinds of other names - the "lower self" as opposed to some idea of a "higher self" - but there is no need to be complicated about it; it is very simple. Where there is the centre, which is the feeling of "me", which in its activities isolates itself, there is division and resistance. And all this is the process of thought. So when you ask what is love, it is not of this centre. Love is not pleasure and pain, nor hate nor violence in any form. 

克：看见一栋房子，觉得它很可爱，然后就有了想要拥有它并从中得到快乐的欲望，然后就会努力去得到它。这一切都构成了一个中心，这个中心就是分裂的原因。这个中心就是“我”的感觉，也就是分裂的原因，因为“我”的这种感觉本身就是分离感。人们称之为自我以及其他各种名称――“低我”，与某个“高我”的概念相对――但是没有必要把它搞复杂；这很简单。如果有中心，也就是“我”的感觉，它的行为就是在孤立它自己，就有了分裂和抗拒。所有这些都是思想的过程。所以当你问爱是什么，爱并不来自那个中心。爱不是快乐和痛苦，也不是任何形式的仇恨和暴力。

     Questioner: Therefore in this love you speak of there can be no sex because there cannot be desire? 
     Krishnamurti: Don't, please, come to any conclusion. We are investigating, exploring. Any conclusion or assumption prevents further enquiry. To answer this question we have also to look at the energy of thought. Thought, as we have said, sustains pleasure by thinking about something that has been pleasurable, cultivating the image, the picture. Thought engenders pleasure. Thinking about the sexual act becomes lust, which is entirely different from the act of sex. What most people are concerned with is the passion of lust. Craving before and after sex is lust. This craving is thought. Thought is not love. 
     Questioner: Can there be sex without this desire of thought? 

发问者：那么在你说的这种爱里，是不是就没有了性，因为没有欲望？
克：请不要得出任何结论。我们在审视，在探索。任何结论或者假设都阻止了进一步的探询。要回答这个问题，我们还必须来看看思想的能量。思想，正如我们所说的，通过思考曾经快乐的事情、培植意象和画面来维持快感。思想产生快感。想着性行为就变成了贪欲，这与性行为本身是完全不同的。大多数人关心的是欲望的激情。在性行为发生之前和之后对性的渴望是贪欲。这种渴望是思想。思想不是爱。
发问者：是否存在没有思想的这种欲望的性？

     Krishnamurti: You have to find out for yourself. Sex plays an extraordinarily important part in our lives because it is perhaps the only deep, firsthand experience we have. Intellectually and emotionally we conform, imitate, follow, obey. There is pain and strife in all our relationships, except in the act of sex. This act, being so different and beautiful, we become addicted to, so it in turn becomes a bondage. The bondage is the demand for its continuation - again the action of the centre which is divisive. One is so hedged about - intellectually, in the family, in the community, through social morality, through religious sanctions - so hedged about that there is only this one relationship left in which there is freedom and intensity. Therefore we give tremendous importance to it. But if there were freedom all around then this would not be such a craving and such a problem. We make it a problem because we can't get enough of it, or because we feel guilty at having got it, or because in getting it we break the rules which society has laid down. It is the old society which calls the new society permissive because for the new society sex is a part of life. In freeing the mind from the bondage of imitation, authority, conformity and religious prescriptions, sex has its own place, but it won't be all-consuming. From this one can see that freedom is essential for love - not the freedom of revolt, not the freedom of doing what one likes nor of indulging openly or secretly one's cravings, but rather the freedom which comes in the understanding of this whole structure and nature of the centre. Then freedom is love. 

克：这你得自己去发现。在我们的生活中，性是一个极其重要的部分，因为它也许是我们拥有的唯一深刻而一手的经验。在智力上，在情感上，我们遵从、模仿、追随以及服从。除了性行为，在我们所有的关系中都有痛苦和冲突。这种行为，是那么的与众不同和美好，我们变得沉溺其中，所以它就变成了一种束缚。这种束缚是渴望它能持续――这又是分裂的中心的行为。人是那么冲突不安――在智力上，在家庭里，在社团里，置身社会道德和宗教制裁之中――人是如此冲突不安，只剩下这一种关系里有自由和热情。所以我们就赋予了它极度的重要性。但是如果到处都有自由的话，那么性就不会成为如此强烈的渴望和这么巨大的问题。我们把它变成了一个问题，因为我们无法得到足够的性，或者因为我们因为得到了它而有负罪感，或者因为在得到它的过程中我们打破了社会定下的规则。旧体制的社会称新体制的社会是放纵的，因为在新社会里性是生活的一部分。把头脑从模仿、权威、遵从和宗教条规的束缚中解放出来，性就有了它自己的位置，但是它不会强烈无度。从这里你能看到自由是爱的精髓――不是反叛的自由，不是为所欲为的自由，也不是公开或者秘密地沉溺于自己的渴望中的自由，而是来自于对这个中心的整个结构和本质的了解的自由。这自由就是爱。

     Questioner: So freedom is not licence? 
     Krishnamurti: No. Licence is bondage. Love is not hate, nor jealousy, nor ambition, nor the competitive spirit with its fear of failure. It is not the love of god nor the love of man - which again is a division. Love is not of the one or of the many. When there is love it is personal and impersonal, with and without an object. It is like the perfume of a flower; one or many can smell it: what matters is the perfume, not to whom it belongs. 

发问者：那么自由不是放纵？
克：不是。放纵是束缚。爱不是恨，不是嫉妒，不是野心，也不是怀着自己对失败的恐惧的竞争精神。不是对神的爱，也不是对人的爱――那还是一种分别。爱不是对一个人的，也不是对很多人的。当有了爱，它就既是个人的也是非个人的，既有又没有一个对象。就像花朵的芬芳；一个人或者很多人都能闻到：重要的是那芬芳，而不是它属于谁。

     Questioner: Where does forgiveness come in all this? 
     Krishnamurti: When there is love there can be no forgiveness. Forgiveness comes only after you have accumulated rancour; forgiveness is resentment. Where there is no wound there is no need for healing. It is inattention that breeds resentment and hate, and you become aware of them and then forgive. Forgiveness encourages division. When you are conscious that you are forgiving, then you are sinning. When you are conscious that you are tolerant, then you are intolerant. When you are conscious that you are silent, then there is no silence. When you deliberately set about to love, then you are violent. As long as there is an observer who says, "I am" or "I am not", love cannot be. 

发问者：在所有这些中，宽恕是怎么个位置？
克：有爱就不可能有宽恕。只有在你积累了冤仇之后，才会有宽恕；宽恕是憎恨。没有伤害就不需要疗愈。是漫不经心滋生了憎恶和仇恨，你意识到了它们，然后宽恕。宽恕助长了分裂。如果你意识到自己在宽恕，那么你就是在犯罪。当你意识到你是宽容的，那么你就是心胸狭窄的。当你意识到你是寂静的，那么就没有寂静了。当你有意地出发去爱，那么你就是暴力的。只要有个观察者在说，“我如何”或者“我不如何”，就不可能有爱。

     Questioner: What place has fear in love? 
     Krishnamurti: How can you ask such a question? Where one is, the other is not. When there is love you can do what you will.

发问者：恐惧在爱中有什么位置？
克：你怎么能问这样一个问题？有一个在，另一个就不在。如果有爱，你就能做想做的任何事情。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'PERCEPTION'
《转变的紧迫性》之“觉知”

     Questioner: You use different words for perception. You sometimes say "perception", but also "observe", "see", "understand", "be aware of". I suppose you use all these words to mean the same thing: to see clearly, completely, wholly. Can one see anything totally? We're not talking of physical or technical things, but psychologically can you perceive or understand anything totally? Isn't there always something concealed so that you only see partially? I'd be most obliged if you could go into this matter rather extensively. I feel this is an important question because it may perhaps be a clue to a great many things in life. If I could understand myself totally then perhaps I would have all my problems solved and be a happy superhuman being. When I talk about it I feel rather excited at the possibility of going beyond my little world with its problems and agonies. So what do you mean by perceiving, seeing? Can one see oneself completely? 

发问者：你使用各种不同的词语来表达觉知。有时候你用到“觉知”，也会用到“观察”、“看到”、“了解”和“觉察”。我想，你用所有这些词都是在表达同一件事情：清晰地，彻底地，完整地看到。一个人能完整地看到任何事情吗？我们说的不是物理上的或者技术上的事情，而是在心理层面，你能完整地觉察或者了解任何事情吗？难道不是总有些东西隐藏着，所以你只能看到局部？如果你能相当深入地探讨这个问题，我将不胜感激。我觉得这是一个很重要的问题，因为它可能是了解生命中很多事情的线索。如果我能够完全了解我自己，那么也许我就能解决我所有的问题，并成为一个快乐而非凡的人。在我谈到这点的时候，我感觉非常兴奋，因为我有可能超越自己充满问题和痛苦的狭隘世界。所以，你说的觉知、看到，究竟是什么意思？一个人能够完全看清自己吗？

     Krishnamurti: We always look at things partially. Firstly because we are inattentive and secondly because we look at things from prejudices, from verbal and psychological images about what we see. So we never see anything completely. Even to look objectively at nature is quite arduous. To look at a flower without any image, without any botanical knowledge - just to observe it - becomes quite difficult because our mind is wandering, uninterested. And even if it is interested it looks at the flower with certain appreciations and verbal descriptions which seem to give the observer a feeling that he has really looked at it. Deliberate looking is not looking. So we really never look at the flower. We look at it through the image. Perhaps it is fairly easy to look at something that doesn't deeply touch us, as when we go to the cinema and see something which stirs us for the moment but which we soon forget. But to observe ourselves without the image - which is the past, our accumulated experience and knowledge - happens very rarely. We have an image about ourselves. We think we ought to be this and not that. We have built a previous idea about ourselves and through it we look at ourselves. We think we are noble or ignoble and seeing what we actually are either depresses us or frightens us. So we cannot look at ourselves; and when we do, it is partial~ observation, and anything that is partial or incomplete doesn't bring understanding. It is only when we can look at ourselves totally that there is a possibility of being free from what we observe. Our perception is not only with the eyes, with the senses, but also with the mind, and obviously the mind is heavily conditioned. So intellectual perception is only partial perception, yet perceiving with the intellect seems to satisfy most of us, and we think we understand. A fragmentary understanding is the most dangerous and destructive thing. And that is exactly what is happening all over the world. The politician, the priest, the businessman, the technician; even the artist - all of them see only partially. And therefore they are really very destructive people. As they play a great part in the world their partial perception becomes the accepted norm, and man is caught in this. Each of us is at the same time the priest, the politician, the businessman, the artist, and many other fragmentary entities. And each of us is.

克：我们总是偏颇地看事情。首先是因为我们漫不经心，其次是因为我们总是透过我们关于所见事物形成的偏见，透过语言和心理意象去观察事物。所以我们从未完整地看到任何事物。即使客观地去观察自然，也变得十分费力。不带有意象地观察一朵花，不带着任何植物学知识――只是单纯地观察它――变得非常困难，因为我们的心智总是在游荡，漠不关心。即使心智感兴趣，它还是会带着某种欣赏之情和语言描述去观察这朵花，这似乎给了观察者一种他确实在观察的感觉。刻意地去看，根本就不是观察。所以我们从未真正观察过花朵。我们透过意象观察它。或许去看某个并没有深深触动我们的东西，会相当容易，而当我们去看电影，会有那么一刻我们被某种东西深深打动，但是我们很快就忘记了。而不带有意象地观察我们自己――这个意象就是过去，是我们积累的经验和知识――这样的观察鲜有发生。我们对自己抱有意象。我们觉得我们自己应该这样，不应该那样。我们已经为自己建立了先入为主的观念，再透过这些观念去观察我们自己。我们认为自己是高尚的或者卑微的，而如实地看到我们自己，要么会让我们沮丧，要么会吓坏我们。所以我们不能完整地观察自己，而在那完整的观察中，是有可能从我们所观察到的情形中解脱的。我们的觉知，不仅仅是通过眼睛，通过感官进行的，而且要用到心智，而心智显然是严重受限的。所以智力上的理解，只是片面的觉知，而智力上的觉知似乎已经让我们大多数人都心满意足了，我们觉得自己明白了。支离破碎的了解是最危险和最具破坏性的东西。而这正是全世界都在发生着的事情。政客，牧师，商人，技术人员；还有艺术家――他们所有人都只是在片面地观察。所以他们是真正非常具有破坏性的人们。因为他们在世界上占有非常重要的地位，他们片面的觉知就变成了公认的规则，而人类也就深陷其中了。我们每个人都同时是牧师，政客，商人，艺术家，以及许多其他支离破碎的实体。我们每个人都是。

     Questioner: I see this clearly. I'm using the word see intellectually, of course. 
发问者：我清楚地看到了这点。当然，我用“看到”这个词，也是从智识上讲的。

     Krishnamurti: If you see this totally, not intellectually or verbally or emotionally, then you will act and live quite a different kind of life. When you see a dangerous precipice or are faced by a dangerous animal there is no partial understanding or partial action; there is complete action. 

克：如果你完全看到了这一点，不是从智识上、字面上或者情感上，那么你就会行动，并开始过一种完全不同的生活。当你看到一个危险的悬崖，或者面对一个危险的动物时，就没有片面的了解或者片面的行动；就会有全然的行动。

     Questioner: But we are not faced with such dangerous crises every moment of our lives. 
发问者：但是我们的生活中并不是每时每刻都面临这么凶险的危机。

     Krishnamurti: We are faced with such dangerous crises all the time. You have become accustomed to them, or are indifferent to them, or you leave it to others to solve the problems; and these others are equally blind and lopsided. 

克：我们确实始终一直面临着这样凶险的危机。你只是习惯了它们，或者对它们漠不关心了，或者你把它们留给别人去解决这些问题了；而这些别人一样的盲目和偏颇。

     Questioner: But how am I to be aware of these crises all the time, and why do you say there is a crisis all the time? 
发问者：但是我要怎样才能始终都觉察到这些危机，而你又为什么说一直是有危机的？

     Krishnamurti: The whole of life is in each moment. Each moment is a challenge. To meet this challenge inadequately is a crisis in living. We don't want to see that these are crises, and we shut our eyes to escape from them. So we become blinder, and the crises augment. 

克：整个生命都在每个瞬间中。每个瞬间都是一项挑战。不恰当地应对这挑战就是生命中的危机。我们不想看到这些是危机，我们闭上眼睛逃避面对。所以我们变得更加盲目，危机就升级了。

     Questioner: But how am I to perceive totally? I'm beginning to understand that I see only partially, and also to understand the importance of looking at myself and the world with complete perception, but there is so much going on in me that it is difficult to decide what to look at. My mind is like a great cage full of restless monkeys. 

发问者：但是我要怎样才能完整地觉知呢？我开始了解到我只是在片面地观察，而且明白了以完全的觉知来观察自己和世界的重要性，但是，我的内在有那么多事情在进行着，很难决定该观察些什么。我的心智就像一个装满了烦躁不安的猴子的大笼子。

     Krishnamurti: If you see one movement totally, in that totality every other movement is included. If you understand one problem completely, then you understand all human problems, for they are all interrelated. So the question is: can one understand, or perceive, or see, one problem so completely that in the very understanding of it one has understood the rest? This problem must be seen while it is happening, not after or before, as memory or as an example. For instance, it is no good now for us to go into anger or fear; the thing to do is to observe them as they arise. Perception is instantaneous: you understand something instantly or not at all: seeing, hearing, understanding are instantaneous. Listening and looking have duration. 

克：如果你完整地观察一项活动，在那完整中，所有其他的活动就都包括在其中了。如果你彻底明白了一个问题，那么你就了解了人类的所有问题，因为它们都是相互关联的。所以问题是：一个人能否如此彻底地了解、觉察或者看到一个问题，在那对问题的了解中，他就明白了所有其他的一切？这个问题必须在发生时被看清，而不是之前或之后，不是作为记忆或者一个例子。比如说，现在我们探讨愤怒或者恐惧，就没有意义；要做的事情是，在它们发生的时候观察它们。觉知是即刻发生的：你要么立即了解某件事情，要么什么都没明白：看到，听到，了解都是即刻发生的。而听和看是有持续性的。

     Questioner: My problem goes on. It exists in a span of time. You are saying that seeing is instantaneous and therefore out of time. What gives jealousy or any other habit, or any other problem, duration? 

发问者：我的问题还在继续。它在一段时间内都存在着。你说看到是即刻发生的，因而摆脱了时间。而是什么给嫉妒或者别的什么习惯或者问题带来了持续性呢？

     Krishnamurti: Don't they go on because you have not looked at them with sensitivity, choiceless awareness, intelligence? You have looked partially and therefore allowed them to continue. And in addition, wanting to get rid of them is another problem with duration. The incapacity to deal with something makes of it a problem with duration, and gives it life. 

克：它们在继续，难道不是因为你没有敏锐地、以智慧和无选择的觉知去观察它们吗？你只是片面地观察，因而就让它们得以继续。此外，想要去除它们，是造成持续性的另一个症结。没能力解决某件事情，就让它成为了一个持续的问题，并赋予了它生命力。

     Questioner: But how am I to see that whole thing instantly? How am I to understand so that it never comes back? 
发问者：但是我要怎样即刻看到事情的全貌？我要如何去了解它，它才再不会反复出现？

     Krishnamurti: Are you laying emphasis on never or on understanding? If you lay emphasis on never it means you want to escape from it permanently, and this means the creation of a second problem. So we have only one question, which is how to see the problem so completely that one is free of it. Perception can only be out of silence, not out of a chattering mind. The chattering may be the wanting to get rid of it, reduce it, escape from it, suppress it or find a substitute for it, but it is only a quiet mind that sees. 

克：你把重点放在再不出现上还是了解上？如果你把重点放在再不出现上，那就意味着你想要永远地从中逃脱，而这意味着制造出了另一个问题。所以我们只有一个问题，也就是要如何完全看清那个问题，从而从中解脱出来。觉知只能出自于寂静，一个喋喋不休的心智是无法觉知的。喋喋不休的心智也许想要除掉那问题，减轻它，逃避它，压抑它，或者寻找一个替代品，但是只有安静的心灵才能看清。

     Questioner: How am I to have a quiet mind? 
发问者：我要如何获得一颗安静的心灵？

     Krishnamurti: You don't see the truth that only a quiet mind sees. How to get a quiet mind doesn't arise. It is the truth that the mind must be quiet, and seeing the truth of this frees the mind from chattering. Perception, which is intelligence, is then operating, not the assumption that you must be silent in order to see. Assumption can also operate but that is a partial, fragmentary operation. There is no relationship between the partial and the total; the partial cannot grow into the total. Therefore seeing is of the greatest importance. Seeing is attention, and it is only inattention that gives rise to a problem. 

克：只有安静的心灵才能看清，你看不到这个真相。如何获得安静的心灵，这个问题不会被提出来。真相是，心智必须安静，看到这个真相，就把心智从喋喋不休中解脱了出来。觉知，也就是智慧，就开始运作了，而不是推断你为了看到而必须安静。推断也能够运作，但是那是片面的，破碎的运作。片面和整体之间没有关系；片面不能融入整体。因此，看到是最重要的。看到就是全神贯注，而只有漫不经心才会导致问题。

     Questioner: How can I be attentive all the time? It's impossible! 
发问者：我要怎样才能一直全神贯注？那是不可能的！

     Krishnamurti: That's quite right, it is impossible. But to be aware of your inattention is of the greatest importance, not how to be attentive all the time. It is greed that asks the question, "How can I be attentive all the time?" One gets lost in the practice of being attentive. The practice of being attentive is inattention. You cannot practice to be beautiful, or to love. When hate ceases the other is. Hate can cease only when you give your whole attention to it, when you learn and do not accumulate knowledge about it. Begin very simply. 

克：非常对，那是不可能的。但是，觉察到你的漫不经心，这点是最重要的，而不是如何一直全神贯注。因为贪婪才会提出这个问题，“我要怎样才能一直全神贯注？”一个人会在练习全神贯注中迷失。练习全神贯注就是漫不经心。你不能练习变得美丽，或者练习去爱。当恨止息时，就有了另一个，爱。只有当你对恨付出全部的注意力，当你在学习但是不再累积关于它的认识时，恨才会止息。很简单地开始。

     Questioner: What is the point of your talking if there is nothing we can practise after having heard you? 
发问者：如果听你说了之后我们没什么可练习的，那你的演讲还有什么意义？

     Krishnamurti: The hearing is of the greatest importance, not what you practise afterwards. The hearing is the instantaneous action. The practice gives duration to problems. Practice is total inattention. Never practise: you can only practise mistakes. Learning is always new.

克：听到是最重要的，而不是你之后去练习些什么。倾听是即刻发生的行动。而练习会使问题持续下去。练习完全就是漫不经心。永远不要练习：你只能练习错误。学习永远都是新鲜的。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'SUFFERING'
《转变的紧迫性》之“苦难”

     Questioner: I seem to have suffered a great deal all my life, not physically, but through death and loneliness and the utter futility of my existence. I had a son whom I greatly loved. He died in an accident. My wife left me, and that caused a great deal of pain. I suppose I am like thousands of other middle-class people with sufficient money and a steady job. I'm not complaining of my circumstances but I want to understand what sorrow means, why it comes at all. One has been told that wisdom comes through sorrow, but I have found quite the contrary. 

发问者：我的整个一生似乎受尽了苦难，不是身体上的痛苦，而是历经死亡和寂寞，以及我那毫无意义的生存。我有个挚爱的儿子。他死于一次事故。我的妻子离开了我，这带来了巨大的痛苦。我想我就像成千上万的中产阶级一样，有足够的钱和一份稳定的工作。我不是在抱怨我的境遇，而是我想了解悲伤意味着什么，究竟为什么会有悲伤。有人说智慧来自悲伤，但是我发现情况正相反。

     Krishnamurti: I wonder what you have learnt from suffering? Have you learnt anything at all? What has sorrow taught you? 
     Questioner: It has certainly taught me never to be attached to people, and a certain bitterness, a certain aloofness and not to allow my feelings to run away with me. It has taught me to be very careful not to get hurt again. 
     Krishnamurti: So, as you say, it hasn't taught you wisdom; on the contrary it has made you more cunning, more insensitive. Does sorrow teach one anything at all except the obvious self-protective reactions? 

克：我想知道你从苦难中学到了什么？你究竟学到任何东西了吗？悲伤教会了你什么？
发问者：当然，它教我永远不要执着于任何人，教会了我某种苦涩，某种超然，不让我逃避我的感觉。它教我要十分小心不再受伤害。
克：那么，如你所说，它没有教你智慧；相反，它使你变得更狡猾，更不敏感。除了这些明显的自我保护反应，悲伤究竟教你任何东西了吗？

     Questioner: I have always accepted suffering as part of my life, but I feel now, somehow, that I'd like to be free of it, free of all the tawdry bitterness and indifference without again going through all the pain of attachment. My life is so pointless and empty, utterly self-enclosed and insignificant. It's a life of mediocrity, and perhaps that mediocrity is the greatest sorrow of all. 

发问者：我一直接受痛苦是我生活的一部分，但是我现在觉得，从某种程度上，我想从中解脱出来，摆脱所有世俗的苦难和冷漠，不再经历所有执著的痛苦。我的生命是如此的没有意义和空虚，极其自我封闭和微不足道。这是平庸的生活，也许平庸是最深重的悲伤。

     Krishnamurti: There is the personal sorrow and the sorrow of the world. There is the sorrow of ignorance and the sorrow of time. This ignorance is the lack of knowing oneself, and the sorrow of time is the deception that time can cure, heal and change. Most people are caught in that deception and either worship sorrow or explain it away. But in either case it continues, and one never asks oneself if it can come to an end. 

克：有个人的悲伤，也有世界的悲伤。有无知的悲伤和时间的悲伤。这种无知是缺乏对自己的认识，时间的悲伤是自欺欺人地认为时间能够治愈，疗伤以及改变。大多数人都被困在这个谎言中，要么礼拜悲伤，要么用解释来打发悲伤。但是，不管用哪种方式，悲伤还是会继续，而人们从来不问问自己悲伤是否能够终止。

     Questioner: But I am asking now if it can come to an end, and how? How am I to end it? I understand that it's no good running away from it, or resisting it with bitterness and cynicism. What am I to do to end the grief which I have carried for so long? 

发问者：但是我现在就在问，它能否终止，以及怎样才能停止？我要如何停止悲伤？我知道，用苦涩嘲讽和玩世不恭来逃避或者抗拒悲伤没有什么好处。我要怎样才能终止我背负了这么久的悲伤？

     Krishnamurti: Self-pity is one of the elements of sorrow. Another element is being attached to someone and encouraging or fostering his attachment to you. Sorrow is not only there when attachment fails you but its seed is in the very beginning of that attachment. In all this the trouble is the utter lack of knowing oneself. Knowing oneself is the ending of sorrow. We are afraid to know ourselves because we have divided ourselves into the good and the bad, the evil and the noble, the pure and the impure. The good is always judging the bad, and these fragments are at war with each other. This war is sorrow. To end sorrow is to see the fact and not invent its opposite, for the opposites contain each other. Walking in this corridor of opposites is sorrow. This fragmentation of life into the high and the low, the noble and the ignoble, God and the Devil, breeds conflict and pain. When there is sorrow, there is no love. Love and sorrow cannot live together. 

克：自怜是悲伤的一个因素。另一个因素是执着于某人，并助长或加强他对你的执着。不仅仅是在你所执着的人离你而去的时候才会有悲伤，而是悲伤的种子在执着刚刚开始的时候就已经种下了。这一切的麻烦都来自于对自己极其缺乏了解。了解自己就是悲伤的终结。我们害怕了解自己，因为我们把自己分成了好和坏，邪恶和高尚，纯洁和不纯洁。好的总是在评判坏的，这些碎片在彼此交战。这战争就是悲伤。终结悲伤就是看到这个事实，而不去臆造它的对立面，因为对立面之中就包含着彼此。在这对立面的通道中行走，就是悲伤。把生活分成高的和低的，高尚的和卑微的，上帝和魔鬼，这种支离破碎的划分就滋生了冲突和痛苦。有悲伤就没有爱。爱和悲伤无法共存。

     Questioner: Ah! But love can inflict sorrow on another. I may love another and yet bring him sorrow. 
     Krishnamurti: Do you bring it, if you love, or does he? If another is attached to you, with or without encouragement, and you turn away from him and he suffers, is it you or he who has brought about his suffering? 
     Questioner: You mean I am not responsible for someone else's sorrow, even if it is on my account? How does sorrow ever end then? 

发问者：啊！但是爱会带给别人悲伤。我可能爱上别人，但是也可能给他带来悲伤。
克：如果你爱着，是你带来了悲伤，还是他带来的？如果别人执着于你，不管这执着有没有受到鼓励，然后你离他而去，他就痛苦，那么是你还是他带来了他的痛苦？
发问者：你的意思是我不用为别人的悲伤负责，即使那是由于我的原因？那么悲伤要怎样才能终止？

     Krishnamurti: As we have said, it is only in knowing oneself completely that sorrow ends. Do you know yourself at a glance, or hope to after a long analysis? Through analysis you cannot know yourself. You can only know yourself without accumulation, in relationship, from moment to moment. This means that one must be aware, without any choice, of what is actually taking place. It means to see oneself as one is, without the opposite, the ideal, without the knowledge of what one has been. If you look at yourself with the eyes of resentment or rancour then what you see is coloured by the past. The shedding of the past all the time when you see yourself is the freedom from the past. Sorrow ends only when there is the light of understanding, and this light is not lit by one experience or by one flash of understanding; this understanding is lighting itself all the time. Nobody can give it to you - no book, trick, teacher or saviour. The understanding of yourself is the ending of sorrow.

克：正如我们说过的，只有在对自己完全的了解中，悲伤才能终止。你是在一瞥之间就了解了自己，还是希望经过漫长的分析来了解自己？通过分析你无法了解自己。只有一刻接一刻地在关系中，没有任何积累，你才能了解自己。这就意味着你必须没有任何选择地觉察到真实发生着的事情。如果你是在用憎恶或者仇恨的双眼来看自己的话，那么你所看到的就被过去染上了颜色。当你看自己的时候始终能够剥离过去，那就是从过去中解脱了出来。只有当有了这种了解的光芒时，悲伤才能终结，这光不是由一次经验或者一次一闪而过的领悟点亮的；这种了解始终都在点亮着自己。没人能把它给你――也没有书本、诀窍，老师或者救主能够给你。了解自己就是悲伤的终结。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'THE HEART AND THE MIND'
《转变的紧迫性》之“心灵与头脑”

     Questioner: Why is it that man has divided his being into different compartments - the intellect and the emotions? Each seems to exist independently of the other. These two driving forces in life are often so contradictory that they seem to tear apart the very fabric of our being. To bring them together so that man can act as a total entity has always been one of the principal aims of life. And added to these two things within man there is a third which is his changing environment. So these two contradictory things within him are further in opposition to the third which appears to be outside himself. Here is a problem so confusing, so contradictory, so vast that the intellect invents an outside agency called God to bring them together, and this further complicates the whole business. There is only this one problem in life. 

发问者：为什么人们把自己的存在分成了两个不同的部分――理智和情感？其中的任何一个似乎都独立于另一个而存在。这两个生活中的驱动力常常互相矛盾，以致于它们似乎在撕裂着我们存在的每个方面。把它们整合在一起，这样人就能作为一个完整的实体来运作，这始终是生命中主要的目标之一。除了人们内在的这两个因素之外，第三个因素就是不断变化的环境。所以人内在这互相矛盾的两者，与表现为他的外在的环境又进一步地对立。这个问题是这么令人困扰，这么矛盾重重，这么巨大，所以心智就发明出一个被称为“上帝”的外在媒介来把它们整合在一起，而这又进一步把整个事情弄得更复杂了。生命中只有这一个问题。

     Krishnamurti: You seem to be carried away by your own words. Is this really a problem to you or are you inventing it in order to have a good discussion? If it is for a discussion then it has no real content. But if it is a real problem then we can go into it deeply. Here we have a very complex situation, the inner dividing itself into compartments and further separating itself from its environment. And still further, it separates the environment, which it calls society, into classes, races and economic, national and geographic groups. This seems to be what is actually going on in the world and we call it living. Being unable to solve this problem we invent a super-entity, an agency that we hope will bring about a harmony and a binding quality in ourselves and between us. This binding quality which we call religion brings about another factor of division in its turn. So the question becomes: what will bring about a complete harmony of living in which there are no divisions but a state in which the intellect and the heart are both the expression of a total entity? That entity is not a fragment. 

克：你似乎被自己的语言给带跑了。对你来说，这真的是个问题吗，还是你只是为了能好好讨论而编造了这个问题？如果只是为了讨论，那么它就没什么真正的内容。但是，如果它真是一个问题，那么我们可以深入探讨一下。我们这里有一种非常复杂的状况，内在地把自己分成了两部分，进一步又把自己跟环境分离开来。更甚者，它还把环境给划分成了所谓的社会、阶级、种族以及经济、国家和地域上的团体。这看起来就是世界上实际正在发生着的事情，我们把它叫做生活。解决不了这个问题，我们就发明了一个超级实体，一个媒介，希望它能带来我们自身和我们之间的和谐与一种持久的品质。这种我们称之为宗教的持久品质，回过头来又带来了另一个分裂的因素。所以问题就变成了：怎样才能带来生活的彻底和谐，其中没有分裂，只有一种状态，在这个状态中，理智和心灵都是一个完整实体的表现。这个实体不是一个碎片。

     Questioner: I agree with you, but how is this to be brought about? This is what man has always longed for and has sought through all religions and all political and social utopias. 

发问者：这点我同意，但是要怎样才能实现这点？这是人类一直渴望的，通过所有的宗教，所有的政治和社会乌托邦，在一直追寻的东西。

     Krishnamurti: You ask how. The "how" is the great mistake. It is the separating factor. There is your "how" and my "how" and somebody else's "how". So if we never used that word we would be really enquiring and not seeking a method to achieve a determined result. So can you put away altogether this idea of a recipe, a result? If you can define a result you already know it and therefore it is conditioned and not free. If we put away the recipe then we are both capable of enquiring if it is at all possible to bring about a harmonious whole without inventing an outside agency, for all outside agencies, whether they are environmental or superenvironmental, only increase the problem. 
     First of all, it is the mind that divides itself as feeling, intellect and environment; it is the mind that invents the outside agency; it is the mind that creates the problem. 

克：你问应该怎样。“怎样”是个巨大的错误。这就是分裂的因素。有你的“怎样”和我的“怎样”，还有别人的“怎样”。所以，如果我们从没用过那个词，我们就真的是在探询了，而不是在寻找一个方法来达成某个设定的结果。所以，你能不能把寻找一个方法或者结果的想法完全放在一边？如果你明确了一个结果，你就已经知道了它，那么就受限了，不自由了。如果我们把方法放在一边，那么我们两个就都能探索了，看看究竟是否可能带来一个和谐的整体，而不用发明一个外在的媒介，因为所有外在的媒介，不管它们是环境里的还是超越环境的，都只会增加问题。
首先，是头脑把自己划分成了感情、理智和环境；是头脑编造出了外在的媒介；是头脑制造了问题。

     Questioner: This division is not only in the mind. It is even stronger in the feelings. The Muslims and Hindus do not think themselves separate, they feel themselves separate, and it is this feeling that actually makes them separate and makes them destroy each other. 

发问者：这种分裂不只是在头脑里有。在感情里这种分裂更严重。穆斯林们和印度教徒们并不认为他们是分离的，他们是感觉到彼此是分离的，实际上是这种感觉在分离他们，让他们互相摧毁对方。

     Krishnamurti: Exactly: the thinking and the feeling are one; they have been one from the beginning and that is exactly what we are saying. So our problem is not the integration of the different fragments but the understanding of this mind and heart which are one. Our problem is not how to get rid of classes or how to build better utopias or breed better political leaders or new religious teachers. Our problem is the mind. To come to this point not theoretically but to see it actually is the highest form of intelligence. For then you do not belong to any class or religious group; then you are not a Muslim, a Hindu, a jew or a Christian. So we now have only one issue: why does the mind of man divide? It not only divides its own functions into feelings and thoughts but separates itself as the "I" from the "you", and the "we" from the "they". The mind and the heart are one. Don't let us forget it. Remember it when we use the word "mind". So our problem is, why does the mind divide? 

克：确实如此：思想和感觉是一体的；它们一开始的时候是一体的，这确实正是我们所说的。所以我们的问题不是把不同的碎片整合在一起，而是了解一体的头脑和心灵。我们的问题不是如何去除阶级，不是如何建立更好的乌托邦，也不是如何培养更好的政治领导人或者新的宗教导师。我们的问题就是头脑。不是从理论上得出这点，而是如实地看到这一点，就是最高形式的智慧。因为那样你就不再属于任何阶级、任何宗教团体；你就不再是一个穆斯林，一个印度教徒，一个犹太教徒或者一个基督徒。那么我们现在就只有一个问题了：为什么人类的头脑要划分？它不仅仅把自己的功能划分为情感和思想，它还把自己作为“我”和“你”分开，把“我们”和“他们”分离开来。头脑和心灵是一体的。我们不要忘了这点。当我们用“头脑”这个词的时候，请记住这点。所有我们的问题是，头脑为什么要划分？

     Questioner: Yes. 
     Krishnamurti: The mind is thought. All the activity of thought is separation, fragmentation. Thought is the response of memory which is the brain. The brain must respond when it sees a danger. This is intelligence, but this same brain has somehow been conditioned not to see the danger of division. Its actions are valid and necessary when they deal with facts. Equally, it will act when it sees the fact that division and fragmentation are dangerous to it. This is not an idea or an ideology or a principle or a concept - all of which are idiotic and separative: it is a fact. To see danger the brain has to be very alert and awake, all of it, not just a segment of it. 

发问者：是的。
克：头脑就是思想。思想的所有行为都是分离，分裂。思想是记忆也就是大脑的反应。大脑看到危险的时候必然会反应。这是智慧，但是这同一个大脑受到了某种局限，看不到分别的危险。在应对事实的时候，它的行动就是有效的必要的。同样，当它看到分别和分裂对它来说是危险的这个事实，它会行动。这不是一个想法、观念、原则或者概念――那些都是愚蠢的分裂的：这是个事实。看到危险，大脑必须非常警觉和清醒，整个大脑都是这样，而不只是其中的一个部分。

     Questioner: How is it possible to keep the whole brain awake? 
     Krishnamurti: As we said, there is no "how" but only seeing the danger, that is the whole point. The seeing is not the result of propaganda or conditioning; the seeing is with the whole brain. When the brain is completely awake then the mind becomes quiet. When the brain is completely awake there is no fragmentation, no separation, no duality. The quality of this quietness is of the highest importance. You can make the mind quiet by drugs and all kinds of tricks but such deceptions breed various other forms of illusion and contradiction. This quietness is the highest form of intelligence which is never personal or impersonal, never yours or mine. Being anonymous, it is whole and immaculate. It defies description for it has no quality. This is awareness, this is attention, this is love, this is the highest. The brain must be completely awake, that's all. As the man in the jungle must keep terribly awake to survive, so the man in the jungle of the world must keep terribly awake to live completely.

发问者：怎么可能让整个大脑都清醒呢？
克：正如我们说过的，没有“如何”，只有看到危险，这就是整个关键所在。这看到不是宣传或者局限的结果；是用整个大脑看到。当大脑完全清醒，心智就变得安静了。当大脑完全清醒，就没有了分裂，没有了分离，没有了二元性。这种寂静的品质是最重要的。你可以用药物和各种把戏让心智变得安静，但是这种欺骗滋生出别的各种形式的幻觉和冲突。这种寂静是最高形式的智慧，它永远不是个人的也不是非个人的，永远不是你的也不是我的。它是无名的，是完整的，完美无暇的。它无法描述，因为它没有特性。这就是觉察，这就是关注，这就是爱，这就是至高无上者。大脑必须完全清醒，就这些。就像丛林里的人必须极度清醒才能生存一样，在世界这个丛林里的人也必须保持极度清醒才能完整地生活。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE 'BEAUTY AND THE ARTIST'
《转变的紧迫性》之“美与艺术家”

     Questioner: I wonder what an artist is? There on the banks of the Ganges, in a dark little room, a man sits weaving a most beautiful sari in silk and gold, and in Paris in his atelier another man is painting a picture which he hopes will bring him fame. Somewhere there is a writer cunningly spinning out stories stating the old, old problem of man and woman; then there is the scientist in his laboratory and the technician putting together a million parts so that a rocket may go to the moon. And in India a musician is living a life of great austerity in order to transmit faithfully the distilled beauty of his music. There is the housewife preparing a meal, and the poet walking alone in the woods. Aren't these all artists in their own way? I feel that beauty is in the hands of everybody, but they don't know it. The man who makes beautiful clothes or excellent shoes, the woman who arranged those flowers on your table, all of them seem to work with beauty. I often wonder why it is that the painter, the sculptor, the composer, the writer - the so-called creative artists - have such extraordinary importance in this world and not the shoemaker or the cook. Aren't they creative too? When you consider all the varieties of expression which people consider beautiful, then what place has a true artist in life, and who is the true artist? It is said that beauty is the very essence of all life. Is that building over there, which is considered to be so beautiful, the expression of that essence? I should greatly appreciate it if you would go into this whole question of beauty and the artist. 

    发问者：我想知道艺术家是什么？在恒河岸边的一个小黑屋子里，一个人坐着用丝线和金线织出一件极其漂亮的纱丽，而在巴黎，另一个人在他的画室里画出一幅画，希望藉此获得美名。在某个地方有个作家在巧妙地编写故事，讲述男人和女人之间那非常非常古老的问题；还有在自己实验室里的科学家，以及在组装无数个零件的技术人员，那样火箭或许就能登月了。在印度，一个音乐家在过一种极其简朴的生活，为了能忠实地传达他音乐中那升华出来的美。还有在准备饭菜的家庭主妇，和在林中独行的诗人。这些人难道不都是有他们自己方式的艺术家吗？我觉得美在每个人的手中，但是他们不知道这点。制作出漂亮的衣服或者极好的鞋子的男人，在你的桌子上摆放那些鲜花的女人，他们所有人似乎都在与美一起工作。我常常纳闷，为什么那些画家，雕塑家，作曲家，作家――所谓创造性的艺术家――在这个世界上拥有如此非凡的重要性，而鞋匠或者厨师就没有。他们难道不也具有创造力吗？如果你把人们认为美的所有表现形式都考虑进来的话，那么一个真正的艺术家在生活中有怎样的位置，谁又是真正的艺术家？有人说美是所有生命的最核心之处。那边的那栋楼，被认为非常漂亮，它是那核心的表现吗？如果你能深入这整个关于美和艺术家的问题，我将不胜感激。

     Krishnamurti: Surely the artist is one who is skilled in action? This action is in life and not outside of life. Therefore if it is living skilfully that truly makes an artist. This skill can operate for a few hours in the day when he is playing an instrument, writing poems or painting pictures, or it can operate a bit more if he is skilled in many such fragments - like those great men of the Renaissance who worked in several different media. But the few hours of music or writing may contradict the rest of his living which is in disorder and confusion. So is such a man an artist at all? The man who plays the violin with artistry and keeps his eye on his fame isn't interested in the violin, he is only exploiting it to be famous, the "me" is far more important than the music, and so it is with the writer or the painter with an eye on fame. The musician identifies his "me" with what he considers to be beautiful music, and the religious man identifies his "me" with what he considers to be the sublime. All these are skilled in their particular little fields but the rest of the vast field of life is disregarded. So we have to find out what is skill in action, in living, not only in painting or in writing or in technology, but how one can live the whole of life with skill and beauty. Are skill and beauty the same? Can a human being - whether he be an artist or not - live the whole of his life with skill and beauty? Living is action and when that action breeds sorrow it ceases to be skilful. So can a man live without sorrow, without friction, without jealousy and greed, without conflict of any kind? The issue is not who is an artist and who is not an artist but whether a human being, you or another, can live without torture and distortion. Of course it is profane to belittle great music, great sculpture, great poetry or dancing, or to sneer at it; that is to be unskilled in one's own life. But the artistry and beauty which is skill in action should operate throughout the day, not just during a few hours of the day. This is the real challenge, not just playing the piano beautifully. You must play it beautifully if you touch it at all, but that is not enough. It is like cultivating a small corner of a huge field. We are concerned with the whole field and that field is life. What we always do is to neglect the whole field and concentrate on fragments, our own or other people's. Artistry is to be completely awake and therefore to be skilful in action in the whole of life, and this is beauty. 

克：擅长行动的人当然就是艺术家？这行动是生活里的，并不在生活之外。因此，如果娴熟地生活，那就真正地造就了一个艺术家。如果他演奏某种乐器，写诗，或者画画，这技艺就在一天中运作几个小时，如果他在很多这样的细碎领域都很擅长，这种技艺就能多运作一会――就像文艺复兴时期的那些伟人，在很多媒质上都能创作。但是搞音乐或者写作的几个小时，也许会和他生活的其他方面相冲突，他生活在失序和困惑中。那么究竟有艺术家这样的人吗？一个人技艺高超地演奏小提琴，同时眼睛紧盯自己的名声，他其实对小提琴并不感兴趣，他只是利用它来成名，“我”比音乐重要多了，着眼于名声的作家或者画家也是一样。音乐家把他的“自我”与他认为的美妙音乐认同在一起，宗教人士把他的“自我”与他认为至高无上的东西认同在一起。所有这些人都在他们特定的小小领域很擅长，却无视生活其他方面的广阔领域。所以我们得去发现行动中，生活中的技艺是什么，而不只是在绘画中、写作中或者技术中的技艺，而是一个人要怎样以技巧和美来过一种完整的生活。技巧和美是一样的吗？一个人能不能――不管他是不是艺术家――以技巧和美来过他完整的生活？生活是行动，当那行动滋生出悲伤，它就不再是技巧娴熟的了。所以，一个人能不能没有悲伤，没有摩擦，没有嫉妒和贪婪，没有任何冲突地生活？这个问题不是谁是艺术家谁不是艺术家，而是一个人能不能，你或者别人，能不能没有折磨和扭曲地生活。当然，贬低或者嘲笑伟大的音乐，伟大的雕塑，伟大的诗歌或者舞蹈，是种不敬；那是一个人不擅长过自己的生活。但是，艺术和美，也就是行动中的技巧，应该整天都在运作，而不是一天只运作几个小时。这是真正的挑战，而不只是动听地弹奏钢琴。如果你接触了钢琴，你就必须动听地弹奏，但是这还不够。这就像只耕作一大片土地中的一个小角落。我们关心的是整片土地，这片土地就是生活。我们总是忽略整个领域，只专注于我们自己的或者别人的那些碎片。艺术即是完全的觉醒，进而在整个生活中擅长行动，而这就是美。

     Questioner: What about the factory worker or the office employee? Is he an artist? Doesn't his work preclude skill in action and so deaden him that he has no skill in anything else either? Is he not conditioned by his work? 

发问者：那工厂的工人或者办公室雇员呢？他是艺术家吗？难道他的工作不正妨碍了行动的技巧，如此压抑他以致于他在其他任何事情上都不擅长？他难道不是被他的工作局限了吗？

     Krishnamurti: Of course he is. But if he wakes up he will either leave his work or so transform it that it becomes artistry. What is important is not the work but the waking up to the work. What is important is not the conditioning of the work but to wake up. 

克：他当然如此。但是如果他觉醒了，他要么会离开他的工作，要么把它变成一门艺术。重要的不是工作，而是对工作醒觉过来。重要的不是工作的局限，而是觉醒。

     Questioner: What do you mean, wake up? 
发问者：你说的觉醒是什么意思？

     Krishnamurti: Are you awakened only by circumstances, by challenges, by some disaster or joy? Or is there a state of being awake without any cause? If you are awakened by an event, a cause, then you depend on it, and when you any dependence is the end of skill, the end of artistry. 

克：你是不是只因为环境，因为挑战，因为某种灾难或者快乐才会醒来？还是有一种觉醒的状态不需要任何原因？如果你因为一件事，一个原因醒来，那么你就会依赖它，如果你有任何依赖，技巧就结束了，艺术就结束了。

     Questioner: What is this other awakened state that has no cause? You are talking about a state in which there is neither a cause nor an effect. Can there be a state of mind that is not the result of some cause? I don't understand that because surely everything we think and everything we are is the result of a cause? There is the endless chain of cause and effect. 

发问者：这另一种没有原因的觉醒状态是什么？你说的是一种既没有原因也没有结果的状态。能有一种不是某种原因的结果的心智状态吗？我不明白，是不是因为我们思考的所有事情，我们所是的一切，必然都是某个原因的结果？因果的链条无休无止。

     Krishnamurti: This chain of cause and effect is endless because the effect becomes the cause and the cause begets further effects, and so on. 

克：因果的链条无休无止，那是因为果会变成因，因又导致更多的果，如此往复。

     Questioner: Then what action is there outside this chain? 
发问者：那么在这链条之外的行动是什么？

     Krishnamurti: All we know is action with a cause, a motive, action which is a result. All action is in relationship. If relationship is based on cause it is cunning adaptation, and therefore inevitably leads to another form of dullness. Love is the only thing that is causeless, that is free; it is beauty, it is skill, it is art. Without love there is no art. When the artist is playing beautifully there is no "me; there is love and beauty, and this is art. This is skill in action. Skill in action is the absence of the "me". Art is the absence of the "me". But when you neglect the whole field of life and concentrate only on a little part - however much the "me" may then be absent, you are still living unskilfully and therefore you are not an artist of life. The absence of "me" in living is love and beauty, which brings its own skill. This is the greatest art: living skilfully in the whole field of Life. 

克：我们所有知道的，只是有原因，有动机的行动，这行动是个结果。所有的行动都处于关系中。如果关系基于原因，那它就是狡猾的调整，因而不可避免地会导致另一种形式的迟钝。爱是唯一没有原因的东西，那是自由的；那是美，是技巧，是艺术。没有爱就没有艺术。当艺术家动听演奏的时候，没有“我”；只有爱和美，这是艺术。这就是行动的技巧。行动的技巧是“我”的缺席。艺术是“我”的缺席。但是当你忽略了生命的整个领域，只集中于一小部分的时候――不管那时“我”如何不在，你还是没有技艺娴熟地生活着，因而你不是生活的艺术家。在生活中“我”的缺席，就是爱和美，这会带来它自己的技巧。这是最伟大的艺术：在整个生命的领域里技艺娴熟地生活。

     Questioner: Oh Lord! How am I to do that? I see it and feel it in my heart but how can I maintain it? 

发问者：哦天哪！我要怎样做到这点？我看到了这点，内心也感受到了，但是我要如何保持它？

     Krishnamurti: There is no way to maintain it, there is no way to nourish it, there is no practising of it; there is only the seeing of it. Seeing is the greatest of all skills.

克：没有办法保持它，没有办法滋养它，没有办法练习它；只有看清这点。看清，是所有技艺中最伟大的。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'DEPENDENCE'
《转变的紧迫性》之“依赖”

     Questioner: I should like to understand the nature of dependence. I have found myself depending on so many things - on women, on different kinds of amusement, on good wine, on my wife and children, on my friends, on what people say. Fortunately I no longer depend on religious entertainment, but I depend on the books I read to stimulate me and on good conversation. I see that the young are also dependent, perhaps not so much as I am, but they have their own particular forms of dependence. I have been to the East and have seen how there they depend on the guru and the family. Tradition there has greater importance and is more deeply rooted than it is here in Europe, and, of course, very much more so than in America. But we all seem to depend on something to sustain us, not only physically but, much more, inwardly. So I am wondering whether it is at all possible to be really free of dependence, and should one be free of it? 

发问者：我想了解依赖的本质。我发觉自己对很多事物都有依赖，我依赖女人、各种娱乐、美酒、妻子和孩子、朋友以及人们的言论。幸运的是，我不再依赖宗教的把戏了，但我还得靠读书来激励自己，还依赖良好的交谈。我看到年轻人同样也有依赖性，也许没有我这样严重吧，但他们有自己特定的依赖形式。我曾到过东方，看到那里的人是多么依赖上师和家庭。比起欧洲这里，传统在那儿显得更加重要，更加根深蒂固，当然，与美国相比，就更甚了。但是似乎我们所有人都依赖某些东西才能生存下去，不仅身体层面是这样，内在更是如此。因此我想知道，究竟有没有可能真正地摆脱所有依赖，而且人是不是应该从中解脱？

     Krishnamurti: I take it you are concerned with the psychological inward attachments. The more one is attached the greater the dependence. The attachment is not only to persons but to ideas and to things. One is attached to a particular environment, to a particular country and so on. And from this springs dependence and therefore resistance. 

克：我想你关心的是心理上内在的执着。一个人越是执着，依赖性就越强。执着的对象不仅可以是人，也可以是观念和实物。一个人可能执着于某种特定的环境，一个特定的国家等等。从执着中就产生了依赖，进而产生了抗拒。

     Questioner: Why resistance? 

发问者：为什么会有抗拒？

     Krishnamurti: The object of my attachment is my territorial or my sexual domain. This I protect, resisting any form of encroachment on it from others. I also limit the freedom of the person to whom I am attached and limit my own freedom. So attachment is resistance. I am attached to something or somebody. That attachment is possessiveness; possessiveness is resistance, so attachment is resistance. 

克：我执着的对象就是我的领地或我的性范畴。我要保护它们，抵抗任何形式的外来入侵。我也限制了我所执着的那个人的自由，同时也为自己的自由设了限。所以，执着就是抗拒。我执着于某人或某物。那种执着就是占有；占有就是抗拒，因此，执着就是抗拒。

     Questioner: Yes, I see that. 

发问者：是的，我懂了。

     Krishnamurti: Any form of encroachment on my possessions leads to violence, legally or psychologically. So attachment is violence, resistance, imprisonment - the imprisonment of oneself and of the object of attachment. Attachment means this is mine and not yours; keep off! So this relationship is resistance against others. The whole world is divided into mine and yours: my opinion, my judgement, my advice, my God, my country - an infinity of such nonsense. Seeing all this taking place, not in abstraction but actually in our daily life, we can ask why there is this attachment to people, things and ideas. Why does one depend? All being is relationship and all relationship is in this dependence with its violence, resistance and domination. We have made the whole world into this. Where one possesses one must dominate. We meet beauty, love springs up, and immediately it turns to attachment and all this misery begins and the love has gone out of the window. Then we ask, "What has happened to our great love?" This is actually what is happening in our daily life. And, seeing all this, we can now ask: why is man invariably attached, not only to that which is lovely, but also to every form of illusion and to so many idiotic fancies? 

克：如果我的财产被人以任何形式侵占，就会导致暴力，通过法律，或者在心理上与其对抗。因此，执着即暴力、抗拒和牢笼――执着的主体和对象都被囚禁了。执着意味着这是我的，不是你的；离远点！由此可见，这种关系乃是对别人的抗拒。整个世界被分成了你的和我的：我的观点，我的判断，我的建议，我的上帝，我的国家――这样的无稽之谈从未休止。看到所有这些事情实实在在地发生在我们的日常生活中，而不是在抽象的思维中，我们会问为什么会有对人、事物和观念的依赖。为什么人必须依赖？一切存在都是关系，所有的关系都处于这种依赖中，与之相伴的是暴力、抗拒和控制。是我们把整个世界变得如此。哪里有占据，哪里就必然会有控制。我们遇见了一个美人，爱情喷涌而出，很快，爱情变成了执着，所有这些苦恼就都开始了，然后爱就悄悄溜出了窗外。之后，我们会问，“我们伟大的爱情到底怎么了?”这就是我们日常生活中实际发生着的事情。看到这一切，我们不禁会问：为什么人类一味地执着，不仅执着于可爱的事物，还执着于各种形式的幻觉以及数不清的愚蠢念头？

     Freedom is not a state of non-dependence; it is a positive state in which there isn't any dependence. But it is not a result, it has no cause. This must be understood very clearly before we can go into the question of why man depends or falls into the trap of attachment with all its miseries. Being attached we try to cultivate a state of independence - which is another form of resistance. 

自由并不是非依赖状态；这是一种积极的状态，其中没有任何的依赖。但它不是结果，也没有起因。在我们深入探讨人类为何依赖或陷入执着的陷阱以及所有与之相伴的痛苦之前，必须清楚地理解上面这点。一旦有执着，我们就会想办法培养一种独立的状态――而这恰是另一种形式的抗拒。    

     Questioner: So what is freedom? You say it is not the negation of dependence or the ending of dependence; you say it is not freedom from something, but just freedom. So what is it? Is it an abstraction or an actuality? 

发问者：那什么才是自由？你刚才说自由并不是对依赖的否定，或者依赖性的终结；你说自由就只是自由而已，而不是相对于某物的解脱。那它是什么样子？它只是一个抽象的概念，还是真实的存在？

     Krishnamurti: It is not an abstraction. It is the state of mind in which there is no form of resistance whatsoever. It is not like a river accommodating itself to boulders here and there, going round or over them. In this freedom there are no boulders at all, only the movement of the water. 

克：它并不抽象。它是一种心境，其中没有任何形式的抗拒。它并不是根据乱石处处调整自己的一条河，或绕过砂砾，或自其上流过。在这自由中，根本没有砂砾，只有水的流动。

     Questioner: But the boulder of attachment is there, in this river of life. You can't just speak about another river in which there are no boulders. 

发问者：可是，执着的砂砾还在那儿，就在生命之河中呀。你不能只说还有另一条河，那里没有砂砾吧。

     Krishnamurti: We are not avoiding the boulder or saying it doesn't exist. We must first understand freedom. It is not the same river as the one in which there are the boulders. 

克：我们并不避开砂砾，或说它不存在。我们首先要懂得自由。它已经与原先那条满是砂砾的河流不是同一条河了。

     Questioner: I have still got my river with its boulders, and that's what I came to ask about, not about some other unknown river without boulders. That's no good to me. 

发问者：可我的河流里还是砂砾密布，我因此才来问你，我不是来问你什么没有砂砾的未知河流。那对我一点用处也没有。

     Krishnamurti: Quite right. But you must understand what freedom is in order to understand your boulders. But don't let us flog this simile to death. We must consider both freedom and attachment. 

克：没错。但要了解你的砂砾，你必须先懂得自由是什么。但是我们不要在这个比喻上死缠烂打下去了。我们应该同时来考虑自由和执着。

     Questioner: What has my attachment to do with freedom or freedom with my attachment? 

发问者：我的执着和自由有什么关系，或者自由和我的执着有什么关系？

     Krishnamurti: In your attachment there is pain. You want to be rid of this pain, so you cultivate detachment which is another form of resistance. In the opposite there is no freedom. These two opposites are identical and mutually strengthen each other. What you are concerned with is how to have the pleasures of attachment without its miseries. You cannot. That is why it is important to understand that freedom does not lie in detachment. In the process of understanding attachment there is freedom, not in running away from attachment. So our question now is, why are human beings attached, dependent? 

克：在你的执着中存在着痛苦。你想摆脱这痛苦，所以你培养超脱，这是抗拒的另一种形式。执着的反面并没有自由。这两种对立之物是相同的，相辅相成互相增强的。你关心的是如何只享受依附的快感，而不想要其中的痛苦。你做不到。因此，超脱之中没有自由，明了这一点非常重要。自由就在了解执着的过程中，而不在对执着的逃避中。所以，现在，我们的问题变成了：为什么人类会执着以及依赖？

     Being nothing, being a desert in oneself, one hopes through another to find water. Being empty, poor, wretched, insufficient, devoid of interest or importance, one hopes through another to be enriched. Through the love of another one hopes to forget oneself. Through the beauty of another one hopes to acquire beauty. Through the family, through the nation, through the lover, through some fantastic belief, one hopes to cover this desert with flowers. And God is the ultimate lover. So one puts hooks into all these things. In this there is pain and uncertainty, and the desert seems more arid than ever before. Of course it is neither more nor less arid; it is what it was, only one has avoided looking at it while escaping through some form of attachment with its pain, and then escaping from that pain into detachment. But one remains arid and empty as before. So instead of trying to escape, either through attachment or through detachment, can we not become aware of this fact, of this deep inward poverty and inadequacy, this dull, hollow isolation? That is the only thing that matters, not attachment or detachment. Can you look at it without any sense of condemnation or evaluation? When you do,are you looking at it as an observer who looks at the observed, or without the observer? 

一个一无所是，孤身处于荒漠的人，期望通过别人找到水源。一个人感到空虚、贫穷、可怜、无能、百无聊赖或无足轻重，希望通过别人来充实他。他想藉由别人的爱来忘却自己，希望藉由他人的美让自己获得美丽。他想藉由家庭、民族、情人以及一些光怪陆离的信念，为那一无所有的荒漠栽满鲜花。最后，上帝成为了终极情人。于是人们将精力投入于所有这些事物中。痛苦和不确定性随之而来，内心的荒漠似乎比以往更贫瘠了。当然，它既没有更贫瘠，也没有更肥沃；它还是原来的样子，这个人只是藉由某种形式的执着以及与之相伴的痛苦，逃避面对现实，然后，又为了逃避那痛苦而选择超脱。可这个人照样贫乏空虚。因此，除了逃避，无论通过执着还是超脱来逃避，我们就不能看清事实，看清这深刻的内在贫乏和欠缺，这沉闷空洞的孤立吗？这才是唯一重要的事情，而不是执着或超脱。你能不带着谴责和评估地看着它吗？当你看着它时，你是作为一个观察者，看着被观察的对象，还是根本就没有观察者？

     Questioner: What do you mean, the observer? 

发问者：你说的“观察者”是什么意思？

     Krishnamurti: Are you looking at it from a centre with all its conclusions of like and dislike, opinion, judgement, the desire to be free of this emptiness and so on - are you looking at this aridness with the eyes of conclusion - or are you looking with eyes that are completely free? When you look at it with completely free eyes there is no observer. If there is no observer, is there the thing observed as loneliness, emptiness, wretchedness? 

克：你是从一个中心看出去，带着所有喜欢或不喜欢的结论、观点、判断以及摆脱空虚的欲望去观察的吗？你在用带有结论的双眼，还是用一双完全自由的眼睛去看那片贫瘠之地呢？当你用完全自由的眼光看时，观察者就消失了。如果没有观察者，被看作孤独、空虚、悲哀的东西还在吗？

     Questioner: Do you mean to say that that tree doesn't exist if I look at it without conclusions, without a centre which is the observer? 

发问者：你的意思是说，如果我不带结论，不以观察者为中心地看时，那棵树就不存在了？

     Krishnamurti: Of course the tree exists. 

克：那棵树当然存在。

     Questioner: Why does loneliness disappear but not the tree when I look without the observer? 

发问者：当我进行没有观察者的观察时，为什么消失的是孤独感，而不是那棵树？

     Krishnamurti: Because the tree is not created by the centre, by the mind of the "me". But the mind of the "me', in all its self-centred activity has created this emptiness, this isolation. And when that mind, without the centre, looks, the self-centred activity ends. So the loneliness is not. Then the mind functions in freedom. Looking at the whole structure of attachment and detachment, and the movement of pain and pleasure, we see how the mind of the "me" builds its own desert and its own escapes. When the mind of the "me" is still, then there is no desert and there is no escape.

克：因为树并不是由那个中心，那个“我”的心智创造的。但那个“我”的心智，通过它自我中心的种种活动制造出了这种空虚和孤立的感觉。当心智不再带着那个中心去看时，自我中心的活动就结束了。孤独感自然也不存在了。然后，心智的运作就自由了。通过观察执着与超脱的整个结构，痛苦和快乐的起伏，我们就会发现“我”的心智如何制造了自己的荒漠，又自行策划着逃脱。当“我”的心灵沉静无波时，既没有荒漠，也不用逃脱。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'BELIEF'
《转变的紧迫性》之“信仰”

     Questioner: I am one of those people who really believe in God. In India I followed one of the great modern saints who, because he believed in God, brought about great political changes there. In India the whole country throbs to the beat of God. I have heard you talk against belief so probably you don't believe in God. But you are a religious person and therefore there must be in you some kind of feeling of the Supreme. I have been all over India and through many parts of Europe, visiting monasteries, churches and mosques, and everywhere I have found this very strong, compelling belief in God whom one hopes shapes one's life. Now since you don't believe in God, although you are a religious person, what exactly is your position with regard to this question? Why don't you believe? Are you an atheist? As you know, in Hinduism you can be an atheist or a theist and yet be equally well a Hindu. Of course it's different with the Christians. If you don't believe in God you can't be a Christian. But that's beside the point. The point is that I have come to ask you to explain your position and demonstrate to me its validity. People follow you and therefore you have a responsibility, and therefore I am challenging you in this way. 

发问者：我是真的信神的那些人之一。在印度我追随过一个伟大的现代圣人，他因为信神，在印度实现了巨大的政治变革。印度这整个国家都随着神的节奏跳动。我听说你在讲话里反对信仰，所以也许你不信神。但你是个宗教人物，所以你内在必然对那至高无上者有某种感觉。我走遍了印度，也去过欧洲的很多地方，拜访过修道院、教堂和清真寺，我发现到处都有这种非常强烈的无法抗拒的对神的信仰，人们希望神来塑造他们的生命。那么，尽管你是个宗教人物，既然你不信神，那么对于这个问题来说，你究竟是个什么立场？你为什么没有信仰？你是个无神论者吗？你知道，在印度教里，你可以是个无神论者，也可以是个有神论者，但都同样地还是印度教徒。当然对于基督徒来说，情形是不同的。如果你不信上帝，你就不可能是个基督徒。但那是次要的问题。问题是，我来请你解释一下你的立场，并向我说明一下你立场的正确性。人们追随你，因而你有这个责任，所以我是在用这种方式来挑战你。

     Krishnamurti: Let us first of all clear up this last point. There are no followers, and I have no responsibility to you or to the people who listen to my talks. Also I am not a Hindu or anything else, for I don't belong to any group, religious or otherwise. Each one must be a light to himself. Therefore there is no teacher, no disciple. This must be clearly understood from the very beginning otherwise one is influenced, one becomes a slave to propaganda and persuasions. Therefore anything that is being said now is not dogma or creed or persuasion: we either meet together in understanding or we don't. Now, you said most emphatically that you believe in God and you probably want through that belief to experience what one might call the godhead. Belief involves many things. There is belief in facts that you may not have seen but can verify, like the existence of New York or the Eiffel Tower. Then you may believe that your wife is faithful though you don't actually know it. She might be unfaithful in thought yet you believe she is faithful because you don't actually see her going off with someone else; she may deceive you in daily thought, and you most certainly have done the same too. You believe in reincarnation, don't you, though there is no certainty that there is any such thing? However, that belief has no validity in your life, has it? All Christians believe that they must love but they do not love - like everyone else they go about killing, physically or psychologically. There are those who do not believe in God and yet do good. There are those who believe in God and kill for that belief; those who prepare for war because they claim they want peace, and so on. So one has to ask oneself what need there is to believe at all in anything, though this doesn't deny the extraordinary mystery of life. But belief is one thing and "what is" is another. Belief is a word, a thought, and this is not the thing, any more than your name is actually you. 

克：让我们首先来澄清一下这最后一点。没什么追随者，我对你没有责任，对那些来听我讲话的人也没有责任。我也不是一个印度教徒或者别的什么身份，因为我不属于任何一个团体，不管是不是宗教性的。每个人都必须做他自己的光。所以没有老师，也没有弟子。从一开始这点就必须明明白白，否则你就会被影响，你就会变成宗教宣传或者说教的奴隶。所以，我说的任何话，都不是教条、信条或者信仰：我们要么在了解中相遇，要么没有。现在，你说最重要的是你信神，你也许希望通过这信仰来体验所谓的神性。信仰涉及到很多事情。有对事实的相信，这事实你不一定亲眼看到，但是可以验证，就像纽约或者埃菲尔铁塔的存在一样。然后你可能相信你的妻子是忠诚的，尽管你并不知道事实是不是这样。她也许在思想上不忠，但是你相信她忠诚，因为你并没有真的看到她跟别人跑掉；她可能在日常思想上欺骗你，而你很可能也做着同样的事情。尽管没法确定确实有转世这回事，但是你相信转世，不是吗？然而，这信仰在你的生活中并没有什么效力，不是吗？所有的基督徒都相信他们必须去爱，但是他们不爱――就跟别人一样，他们四处杀戮，不管是身体上还是心理上的杀戮。有些人不信神但是做着善事。有些人信神，并为这个信仰去杀人；那些备战的人声称那是因为他们想要和平，等等等等。所以一个人得问问自己，到底有什么必要去相信任何事情，尽管这么说并不否定生命那异乎寻常的神秘。但是信仰是一回事，“现实状况”是另一回事。信仰是一个词语，一个想法，那不是事实本身，真实的你远远不只是你的名字而已。

     Through experience you hope to touch the truth of your belief, to prove it to yourself, but this belief conditions your experience. It isn't that the experience comes to prove the belief, but rather that the belief begets the experience. Your belief in God will give you the experience of what you call God. You will always experience what you believe and nothing else. And this invalidates your experience. The Christian will see virgins, angels and Christ, and the Hindu will see similar deities in extravagant plurality. The Muslim, the Buddhist, the Jew and the Communist are the same. Belief conditions its own supposed proof. What is important is not what you believe but only why you believe at all. Why do you believe? And what difference does it make to what actually is whether you believe one thing or another? Facts are not influenced by belief or disbelief. So one has to ask why one believes at all in anything; what is the basis of belief? Is it fear, is it the uncertainty of life - the fear of the unknown the lack of security in this everchanging world? Is it the insecurity of relationship, or is it that faced with the immensity of life, and not understanding it, one encloses oneself in the refuge of belief? So, if I may ask you, if you had no fear at all, would you have any belief? 

你希望通过体验来触及你的信仰的真实性，向你自己证明这点，但是这信仰局限了你的体验。不是由体验来证明信仰，而是由信仰引发了体验。你对神的信仰会带给你所谓神的体验。你体验到的始终只是你所相信的而已，别的什么也没有。而这就证明了你的体验的错误。基督徒会看见圣母、天使和基督，印度徒会看见不计其数的类似的神祗。穆斯林、佛教徒、犹太教徒和共产主义者也都一样。信仰限定了它自身想要的证明。重要的不是你相信什么，而是你到底为什么要去相信。你为什么相信？你相信这个还是相信那个，对于事实究竟如何，有任何改变吗？相信或者不信影响不了事实。所以一个人必须要问一问，究竟为什么要去相信任何事情；信念的基础是什么？是不是恐惧，是不是生命的不确定性――对未知的恐惧，在这个无时无刻不在改变的世界中缺乏安全感？是不是关系中的不安全感，是不是面对广阔无垠的生命，无法了解它，人就会把自己封闭在信仰的避难所里？所以，如果我可以问你的话，如果你根本没有恐惧，你还需要任何信仰吗？

     Questioner: I am not at all sure that I am afraid, but I love God, and it is this love that makes me believe in Him. 
     Krishnamurti: Do you mean to say you are devoid of fear? And therefore know what love is? 
     Questioner: I have replaced fear with love and so to me fear is non-existent, and therefore my belief is not based on fear. 

发问者：我根本不确定我是不是恐惧，但是我热爱神，是这种爱让我相信他。
克：你的意思是说你没有恐惧了？所以你知道爱是什么？
发问者：我用爱替换掉了恐惧，所以对我来说恐惧是不存在的，所以我的信仰不是基于恐惧的。

     Krishnamurti: Can you substitute love for fear? Is that not an act of thought which is afraid and therefore covers up the fear with the word called love, again a belief? You have covered up that fear with a word and you cling to the word, hoping to dissipate fear. 

克：你能用爱代替恐惧吗？那不正是恐惧着的思想的行为吗，然后用爱这个词，也就是又一个信仰来掩盖恐惧？你用一个词掩盖起了恐惧，你紧抓着这个词，希望能驱散恐惧。

     Questioner: What you are saying disturbs me greatly. I am not at all sure I want to go on with this, because my belief and my love have sustained me and helped me to lead a decent life. This questioning of my belief brings about a sense of disorder of which, quite frankly, I am afraid. 

发问者：你说的话让我感到深深不安。我完全不确定我是否愿意继续探讨下去，因为我的信仰和我的爱一直支撑着我，帮我过着一种体面的生活。对我的信仰的这种质疑带来了一种失序感，坦白地说，这点我很害怕。

     Krishnamurti: So there is fear, which you are beginning to discover for yourself. This disturbs you. Belief comes from fear and is the most destructive thing. One must be free of fear and of belief. Belief divides people, makes them hard, makes them hate each other and cultivate war. In a roundabout way, unwillingly, you are admitting that fear begets belief. Freedom from belief is necessary to face the fact of fear. Belief like any other ideal is an escape from "what is". When there is no fear then the mind is in quite a different dimension. Only then can you ask the question whether there is a God or not. A mind clouded by fear or belief is incapable of any kind of understanding, any realization of what truth is. Such a mind lives in illusion and can obviously not come upon that which is Supreme. The Supreme has nothing to do with your or anybody else's belief, opinion or conclusion. 

克：所以是有恐惧的，你正开始自己去发现这点。这让你不安。信仰来自恐惧，而这是最具破坏力的东西。一个人必须摆脱恐惧，摆脱信仰。信仰将人们分裂，把他们变得冷酷，让他们彼此憎恨，催生战争。你在用一种迂回的方式，不情愿地承认了恐惧产生信仰。从信仰中解脱出来，需要面对恐惧这个事实。只有这时你才能问有没有神这个问题。被恐惧或者信仰笼罩的头脑是无法有任何了解的，完全无法领悟真相是什么。这样的头脑生活在幻象中，显然不可能遭遇那至高无上者。那至高无上者与你的或者别人的信仰、观念或者结论完全无关。

     Not knowing, you believe, but to know is not to know. To know is within the tiny field of time and the mind that says, "I know" is bound by time and so cannot possibly understand that which is. After all, when you say, "I know my wife and my friend", you know only the image or the memory, and this is the past. Therefore you can never actually know anybody or anything. You cannot know a living thing, only a dead thing. When you see this you will no longer think of relationship in terms of knowing. So one can never say, "There is no God", or "I know God". Both these are a blasphemy. To understand that which is there must be freedom, not only from the known but also from the fear of the known and from the fear of the unknown. 

因为不知道，所以你相信，但是知道就是不知道。知道是在时间这个狭小的范围内的，说“我知道”的头脑受限于时间，所以不可能了解真实状况。毕竟，当你说，“我知道我的妻子和我的朋友”，你知道的只是意象或者记忆，那是过去。所以你永远无法真正知道任何人或者任何事情。你无法知道一个活生生的东西，只能知道死去的东西。当你看到了这点，你就不会再以知道的方式来看待关系了。所以你永远不会说，“没有神”，或者“我知道神”。这两者都是亵渎。要了解真实状况，就必须有自由，不只是从已知中解脱的自由，而且是从对已知的恐惧和对未知的恐惧中解脱出来的自由。

     Questioner: You speak of understanding that which "is" and yet you deny the validity of knowing. What is this understanding if it is not knowing? 

发问者：你说了解“真实”状况，但是你又否定了知道的正确性。如果不知道，那这种了解又是什么？

     Krishnamurti: The two are quite different. Knowing is always related to the past and therefore it binds you to the past. Unlike knowing understanding is not a conclusion, not accumulation. If you have listened you have understood. Understanding is attention. When you attend completely you understand. So the understanding of fear is the ending of fear. Your belief can therefore no longer be the predominant factor; the understanding of fear is predominant. When there is no fear there is freedom. It is only then that one can find what is true. When that which "is" is not distorted by fear then that which "is" is true. It is not the word. You cannot measure truth with words. Love is not a word nor a belief nor something that you can capture and say, "It is mine". Without love and beauty, that which you call God is nothing at all.

克：这两个是非常不同的。知道总是与过去相关，因而它就把你和过去捆绑在一起了。与知道不同，了解不是一个结论，不是积累。如果你刚才聆听了，你就已经明白了。了解是关注。当你全神贯注时，你会了解。所以对恐惧的了解，就是恐惧的终结。你的信仰就不再是主导因素了；对恐惧的了解占了主导。没有了恐惧就有了自由。只有这时你才能发现真实的是什么。当“真实”状况没有被恐惧扭曲的时候，“真实”状况才是实实在在的。那不是词语。你无法用语言衡量真相。爱不是一个词，不是一个信念，也不是你能捕捉到的什么东西，说“这是我的”。没有爱和美，你所谓的神根本什么都不是。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'DREAMS'
《转变的紧迫性》之“梦”

     Questioner: I have been told by professionals that dreaming is as vital as daytime thinking and activity, and that I would find my daily living under great stress and strain if I did not dream. They insist, and here I'm using not their jargon but my own words, that during certain periods of sleep the movement of the eyelids indicates refreshing dreams and that these bring a certain clarity to the brain. I am wondering whether the stillness of the mind which you have often spoken about might not bring greater harmony to living than the equilibrium brought about by patterns of dreams. I should also like to ask why the language of dreams is one of symbols. 

发问者：有专业人士曾经告诉我，做梦就像白天的思考和行为一样至关重要，如果我不做梦，就会发现自己的日常生活处于巨大的压力和紧张之中。他们坚称，这里我用的不是我自己的话，而是他们的术语，在睡眠的某些阶段中，眼睑的运动标志着梦在更新，而这给大脑带来某种清晰。我想知道，相对于各种形式的梦为心情带来的平静，你经常提到的头脑的寂静，是否并不能给生活带来更多和谐。我也想问问为什么梦的语言是一种象征性的符号。

     Krishnamurti: Language itself is a symbol, and we are used to symbols: we see the tree through the image which is the symbol of the tree, we see our neighbour through the image we have about him. Apparently it is one of the most difficult things for a human being to look at anything directly, not through images, opinions, conclusions, which are all symbols. And so in dreams symbols play a large part and in this there is great deception and danger. The meaning of a dream is not always clear to us, although we realize it is in symbols and try to decipher them. When we see something, we speak of it so spontaneously that we do not recognise that words are also symbols. All this indicates, doesn't it, that there is direct communication in technical matters but seldom in human relationships and understanding? You don't need symbols when somebody hits you. That is a direct communication. This is a very interesting point: the mind refuses to see things directly, to be aware of itself without the word and the symbol. You say the sky is blue. The listener then deciphers this according to his own reference of blueness and transmits it to you in his own cipher. So we live in symbols, and dreams are a part of this symbolic process. We are incapable of direct and immediate perception without the symbols, the words, the prejudices and conclusions. The reason for this is also quite apparent: it is part of the self-centred activity with its defences, resistances, escapes and fears. There is a ciphered response in the activity of the brain, and dreams must naturally be symbolic because during the waking hours we are incapable of direct response or perception. 

克：语言本身就是一种符号，而我们都对符号习以为常：我们通过意象观察树，而这意象是树的符号，我们通过对我们的邻居抱有的意象来看他。很显然，不通过意象、观点、结论这些符号，直接地观察事物，对人类来说是最困难的事情之一。同样在梦里，符号也有巨大的影响，其中有巨大的欺骗和危险。梦的含义对我们来说并不总是那么清晰，尽管我们意识到梦里充满符号，并且试图去破解它们。当我们看到了点什么，我们就会不由自主地谈论起来，却没有意识到语言也是符号。这一切都表明，在技术方面可以直接沟通，但是在人类的关系和理解方面，却鲜有直接的交流，不是吗？有人打你的时候，你并不需要符号。那是一种直接的交流。这点非常有趣：头脑拒绝直接看到事物，不带语言和符号地觉察它自己。你说天空是蓝色的。然后听者根据他自己对蓝色的理解来破解你的话，再用他自己的密码传达给你。所以我们生活在符号里，而梦也是这符号化过程的一部分。我们无法不带着符号、语言、偏见和结论即刻直接地去觉察。而造成这点的原因也相当明显：这是带着防御、抵抗和结论的自我中心行为的一部分。在头脑的活动中有一种密码式的反应，而梦必然是符号化的，因为在醒着的时候，我们无法直接地反应或者观察。

     Questioner: It seems to me that this then is an inherent function of the brain. 
     Krishnamurti: Inherent means something permanent, inevitable and lasting. Surely any psychological state can be changed. Only the deep, constant demand of the brain for the physical security of the organism is inherent. Symbols are a device of the brain to protect the psyche; this is the whole process of thought. The "me" is a symbol, not an actuality. Having created the symbol of the "me", thought identifies itself with its conclusion, with the formula, and then defends it: all misery and sorrow come from this. 

发问者：在我看来，这就是大脑固有的一种功能。
克：固有意味着某种永久的、不可避免的、持续的东西。但任何心理状态都是肯定会改变的。只有大脑对有机体身体上安全的持久需求才是固有的。符号是大脑为了保护心智的一种设置；而这就是整个思想过程。“我”是个符号，不是真实。思想制造出了“我”这个符号，把自己等同于它的结论和模式，然后对其进行捍卫：所有的苦难和悲伤由此而生。

     Questioner: Then how do I get around it? 
     Krishnamurti: When you ask how to get around it, you are still holding on to the symbol of the "me", which is fictitious; you become something separate from what you see, and so duality arises. 
     Questioner: May I come back another day to continue this? 

发问者：那么我要如何避开它？
克：当你问如何避开它时，你还是在紧抓着“我”这个虚幻的符号不放；你就变成了不同于你所见的某种东西，而这就产生了二元性。
发问者：我可以改天再回来继续这个话题吗？

     * * * 
     Questioner: You were good enough to let me come back, and I should like to continue where we left off. We were talking about symbols in dreams and you pointed out that we live by symbols, deciphering them according to our gratification. We do this not only in dreams but in everyday life; it is our usual behaviour. Most of our actions are based on the interpretation of the symbols or images that we have. Strangely, after having talked with you the other day, my dreams have taken a peculiar turn. I have had very disturbing dreams and the interpretation of those dreams took place as they were happening within the dreams. It was a simultaneous process; the dream was being interpreted by the dreamer. This has never happened to me before. 

发问者：能让我回来，你真好，我想从我们上次说到的地方继续探讨。我们说到了梦里的符号，你指出我们依靠符号生活，并根据我们的喜好来对其进行破解。我们不只是在梦里会这么做，而且在日常生活中也如此；这是我们经常的行为。我们的大部分行为都基于对我们抱有的各种符号或意象的诠释。奇怪的是，那天跟你谈了之后，我的梦发生了一种特别的转变。我做了些非常令人困扰的梦，对那些梦的诠释发生在做梦的同时。这是个同时进行的过程；发梦者在解释着梦。这些以前我从未遇到过。

     Krishnamurti: During our waking hours, there is always the observer, different from the observed, the actor, separate from his action. In the same way there is the dreamer separate from his dream. He thinks it is separate from himself and therefore in need of interpretation. But is the dream separate from the dreamer, and is there any need to interpret it? When the observer is the observed what need is there to interpret, to judge, to evaluate? This need would exist only if the observer were different from the thing observed. This is very important to understand. We have separated the thing observed from the observer and from this arises not only the problem of interpretation but also conflict, and the many problems connected with it. This division is an illusion. This division between groups, races, nationalities, is fictitious. We are beings, undivided by names, by labels. When the labels become all important, division takes place, and then wars and all other struggles come into being. 

克：我们在醒着的时候，总是有不同于被观察者的观察者，与他的行为分离的行为者。同样，有与他的梦分离的发梦者。他认为梦是与他分开的，因此需要解释。但是，梦与发梦者是分开的吗，而且有任何必要去解释梦吗？当观察者就是被观察者，还有什么必要去解释、判断和评估呢？只有观察者不同于所观之物的时候，才存在这种需要。理解这一点非常重要。我们把所观之物与观察者分离开来，从中不仅产生了诠释的问题，还产生了冲突，以及与之相关的诸多问题。这种分离是一种幻觉。群体、种族、国家之间的分别是虚幻的。我们是未被名字、标签分割的生命体。当这些标签变得无比重要时，分别就发生了，然后就产生了战争以及其他所有的争斗。

     Questioner: How then do I understand the content of the dream? It must have significance. Is it an accident that I dream of some particular event or person? 

发问者：那么我要如何理解梦的内容呢？它必然有它的意义。我梦到某个特别的事件或者人，这难道是一桩意外吗？

     Krishnamurti: We should really look at this quite differently. Is there anything to understand? When the observer thinks he is different from the thing observed there is an attempt to understand that which is outside himself. The same process goes on within him. There is the observer wishing to understand the thing he observes, which is himself. But when the observer is the observed, there is no question of understanding; there is only observation. You say that there is something to understand in the dream, otherwise there would be no dream, you say that the dream is a hint of something unresolved that one should understand. You use the word "understand", and in that very word is the dualistic process. You think there is an "I", and a thing to be understood, whereas in reality these two entities are one and the same. Therefore your search for a meaning in the dream is the action of conflict. 

克：我们真应该以相当不同的视角来看这个问题。有什么要理解的吗？当观察者以为他与所观之物不同时，就会试图理解他自身之外的东西。而同样的过程就发生在他的内在。有个观察者希望理解他观察的事物，也就是他自己。但是当观察者就是被观察者时，就没有理解的问题了；只有观察。你说梦里有些东西需要理解，否则就不会有梦，你说梦暗示了人应该去了解但尚未解答的某些事物。你用“理解”这个词，这个词本身就是二元化的过程。你认为有个“我”，有个要被了解的东西，而实际上这两个实体是同一个，是同样的。所以你从梦里寻找意义，这是冲突的行为。

     Questioner: Would you say the dream is an expression of something in the mind? 
     Krishnamurti: Obviously it is. 
     Questioner: I do not understand how it is possible to regard a dream in the way you are describing it. If it has no significance, why does it exist? 

发问者：你说梦是头脑中某些东西的表达吗？
克：显然是的。
发问者：我不知道怎么可能以你描述的方式来看待梦。如果梦没有意义，那它为什么要存在？

     Krishnamurti: The "I" is the dreamer, and the dreamer wants to see significance in the dream which he has invented or projected, so both are dreams, both are unreal. This unreality has become real to the dreamer, to the observer who thinks of himself as separate. The whole problem of dream interpretation arises out of this separation, this division between the actor and the action. 

克：“我”是发梦者，这个发梦者想看到他在梦里编造或者投射出来的意义，而这两者都是梦，都是不真实的。这种不真实，对于发梦者，对于认为自己是分离的观察者来说，变得真实起来。从这种分离中，从这种行为者和行为的分裂中，就产生了诠释梦的整个问题。

     Questioner: I am getting more and more confused, so may we go over it again differently? I can see that a dream is the product of my mind and not separate from it, but dreams seem to come from levels of the mind which have not been explored, and so they seem to be intimations of something alive in the mind. 

发问者：我越来越困惑了，所以我们可不可以换种方式再来探讨一下？我能明白梦是我头脑的产物，不是分离的，但是梦似乎来自头脑中未被探索的那些层面，所以它们似乎暗示了头脑中某些活跃着的东西。

     Krishnamurti: It is not your particular mind in which there are hidden things. Your mind is the mind of man; your consciousness is the whole of man. But when you particularize it as your mind, you limit its activity, and because of this limitation, dreams arise. During waking hours observe without the observer, who is the expression of limitation. Any division is a limitation. Having divided itself into a "me" and a "not me", the "me", the observer, the dreamer, has many problems - among them dreams and the interpretation of dreams. In any case, you will see the significance or the value of a dream only in a limited way because the observer is always limited. The dreamer perpetuates his own limitation, therefore the dream is always the expression of the incomplete, never of the whole. 

克：并不是你那个特别的头脑里才会有隐藏的东西。你的头脑就是整个人类的头脑；你的意识就是整个人类。但是当你把它特殊化为你的头脑时，你就局限了它的活动，因为这种局限，梦就产生了。在醒着的时候，没有观察者地去观察，观察者就是局限的表现。任何分别都是局限。把自己划分为“我”和“非我”，“我”，也就是观察者、发梦者，就有了很多问题――其中就有梦和对梦的诠释。无论如何，你只能以局限的方式看到梦的意义或者价值，因为观察者始终是局限的。发梦者将自己的局限永久化，因此梦始终是不完整的表达，永远不是全部。

     Questioner: Pieces are brought back from the moon in order to understand the composition of the moon. In the same way we try to understand human thinking by bringing back pieces from our dreams, and examining what they express. 

发问者：通过从月球上取回碎片，来了解月球的构成。同样，通过从我们的梦里取出碎片并对其表达的含义进行检验，我们试图来了解人类的思维。

     Krishnamurti: The expressions of the mind are the fragments of the mind. Each fragment expresses itself in its own way and contradicts other fragments. A dream may contradict another dream, one action another action, one desire another desire. The mind lives in this confusion. A part of the mind says it must understand another part, such as a dream, an action or a desire. So each fragment has its own observer, its own activity; then a super-observer tries to bring them all into harmony. The super-observer is also a fragment of the mind. It is these contradictions, these divisions, that breed dreams. 

克：头脑所表达的，只是头脑的碎片而已。每个碎片以自己的方式表达着自身，并与其他碎片互相矛盾。一个梦可能会与另一个梦矛盾，一个行为与另一个行为，一个欲望与另一欲望也可能是矛盾的。头脑就生活在这种困惑中。头脑的一部分说必须要去理解另一个部分，比如一个梦、一个行为或者欲望。所以每个碎片都有它自己的观察者，它自己的行为；然后一个超观察者试图将它们和谐地组织在一起。这个超观察者也是头脑的一个碎片。是这些矛盾，这些划分，产生了梦。

     So the real question is not the interpretation or the understanding of a particular dream; it is the perception that these many fragments are contained in the whole. Then you see yourself as a whole and not as a fragment of a whole. 

所以真正的问题，不是诠释或者理解某个特定的梦；而是看到这许多的碎片都是包含在整体中的。然后你就能将自己作为一个整体看到，而不是整体的一个碎片。

     Questioner: Are you saying, sir, that one should be aware during the day of the whole movement of life, not just one's family life, or business life, or any other individual aspect of life? 

发问者：先生，你是不是说，一个人应该在白天对整个生活的运作都知晓，而不是仅仅注意他的家庭生活，事业生活或者生活中其他任何一个单独的方面？

     Krishnamurti: Consciousness is the whole of man and does not belong to a particular man. When there is the consciousness of one particular man there is the complex problem of fragmentation, contradiction and war. When there is awareness of the total movement of life in a human being during the waking hours, what need is there for dreams at all? This total awareness, this attention, puts an end to fragmentation and to division. When there is no conflict whatsoever the mind has no need for dreams. 
     Questioner: This certainly opens a door through which I see many things.

克：意识是整个人类的，并不属于一个特定的人。如果有某个特定的人的意识，就会有支离破碎、矛盾和战争这些复杂的问题。如果在醒着的时候觉察到一个人生活的整体运动，那还有什么必要做梦？这种全然的觉察，这种全神贯注，就终结了支离破碎和分别。如果任何冲突都没有了，头脑就不需要梦了。
发问者：当然这开启了一扇门，通过它，我看到了很多。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'TRADITION'
《转变的紧迫性》之“传统”

     Questioner: Can one really be free of tradition? Can one be free of anything at all? Or is it a matter of sidestepping it and not being concerned with any of it? You talk a great deal about the past and its conditioning - but can I be really free of this whole background of my life? Or can I merely modify the background according to the various outward demands and challenges, adjust myself to it rather than become free of it? It seems to me that this is one of the most important things, and I'd like to understand it because I always feel that I am carrying a burden, the weight of the past. I would like to put it down and walk away from it, never come back to it. Is that possible? 

发问者：一个人能真的摆脱传统吗？一个人究竟能摆脱任何事情吗？还是一个回避并且不再参与其中的问题？关于过去及其局限性，你讲了很多――但是我真的能摆脱我生活的这整个背景吗？还是我只能根据各种外部的需求和挑战来调整这个背景，调整我自己，而不是从中解脱？这对我来说似乎是最重要的事情之一，我很想了解这点，因为我总是觉得自己在背负着一个重担，过去的重负。我想把它放下，离开它，永远不再回去。这可能吗？

     Krishnamurti: Doesn't tradition mean carrying the past over to the present? The past is not only one's particular set of inheritances but also the weight of all the collective thought of a particular group of people who have lived in a particular culture and tradition. One carries the accumulated knowledge and experience of the race and the family. All this is the past - the carrying over from the known to the present - which shapes the future. Is not the teaching of all history a form of tradition? You are asking if one can be free of all this. First of all, why does one want to be free? Why does one want to put down this burden? Why? 

克：传统不正是意味着把过去背负到现在吗？过去不只是一个人自己特定的一系列遗传，而且也是一个特定人群所有集体思想的重负，这群人一直生活在某种特定的文化和传统中。人背负着种族和家庭积累下来的知识和经验。这一切都是过去――从已知中传承到现在的东西――而这些又塑造了未来。教授所有的历史，这难道不是传统的一种形式吗？你问一个人能不能从这一切中解脱出来。首先，一个人为什么想要解脱出来？他为什么想要放下这个负担？为什么？

     Questioner: I think it's fairly simple. I don't want to be the past - I want to be myself; I want to be cleansed of this whole tradition so that I can be a new human being. I think in most of us there is this feeling of wanting to be born anew. 
     Krishnamurti: You cannot possibly be the new just by wishing for it. Or by struggling to be new. You have not only to understand the past but also you have to find out who you are. Are you not the past? Are you not the continuation of what has been, modified by the present? 

发问者：我想这很简单。我不想成为过去――我想做我自己；我想清除掉这整个传统，这样我就能成为一个新人类。我想我们大部分人都有这种想要新生的感觉。
克：你不可能单凭有这么个愿望就能变成新人类。奋力求新也不行。你不仅仅需要了解过去，而且要明白你是谁。你不就是过去吗？你不就是经过现在修改的过去的延续吗？

     Questioner: My actions and my thoughts are, but my existence isn't. 
     Krishnamurti: Can you separate the two, action and thought, from existence? Are not thought, action, existence, living and relationship all one? This fragmentation into "me" and "not-me" is part of this tradition. 
     Questioner: Do you mean that when I am not thinking, when the past is not operating, I am obliterated, that I have ceased to exist? 

发问者：我的行为和我的思想是这样的，但是我的存在不是。
克：你能把行为和思想这两者与存在分开吗？思想、行为、存在、生活和关系不都是一体的吗？这种对“我”和“非我”的划分，就是这传统的一部分。
发问者：你的意思是不是，当我不思考，当过去不运作了，我就被消灭掉了，我就停止生存了？

     Krishnamurti: Don't let us ask too many questions, but consider what we began with. Can one be free of the past - not only the recent but the immemorial, the collective, the racial, the human, the animal? You are all that, you are not separate from that. And you are asking whether you can put all that aside and be born anew. The "you" is that, and when you wish to be reborn as a new entity, the new entity you imagine is a projection of the old, covered over with the word "new". But underneath, you are the past. So the question is, can the past be put aside or does a modified form of tradition continue for ever, changing, accumulating, discarding, but always the past in different combinations? The past is the cause and the present is the effect, and today, which is the effect of yesterday, becomes the cause of tomorrow. This chain is the way of thought, for thought is the past. You are asking whether one can stop this movement of yesterday into today. Can one look at the past to examine it, or is that not possible at all? To look at it the observer must be outside it - and he isn't. So here arises another issue. If the observer himself is the past then how can the past be isolated for observation? 

克：我们不要一下子问那么多问题，而是要想一下从哪里开始。一个人能否摆脱过去――不只是最近的过去，而且是远古的，集体的，种族的，作为人类和动物的整个过去？你就是那一切，你与那些是分不开的。而你问你能否把这一切放在一边，获得新生。“你”就是那一切，当你希望作为一个新实体获得新生时，那个你想象出来的新实体只是来自过去的一种投射，冠以了一个“新”的名词而已。然而掩藏其下的，你就是过去。所以问题是，能否把过去放在一边，还是传统以某种修整过的形式永远持续下去，改动，积累，丢弃，但永远是那个以不同形式组合着的过去？过去是因，现在是果，今天是昨天的果，又会变成明天的因。这个链条就是思想的运作方式，因为思想就是过去。你问一个人能否停止从昨天到今天的这种运动。一个人能否观察过去，审视过去，还是这根本就不可能？要观察这点，观察者必须置身事外――而实际上他并不是存在于其外的。所以这里就产生了另一个问题。如果观察者本身就是过去，那么过去怎么能从观察中孤立出来？

     Questioner: I can look at something objectively.... 
     Krishnamurti: But you, who are the observer, are the past trying to look at itself. You can objectify yourself only as an image which you have put together through the years in every form of relationship, and so the "you" which you objectify is memory and imagination, the past. You are trying to look at yourself as though you were a different entity from the one who is looking, but you are the past, with its old judgements, evaluations and so on. The action of the past is looking at the memory of the past. Therefore there is never relief from the past. The continuous examination of the past by the past perpetuates the past; this is the very action of the past, and this is the very essence of tradition. 

发问者：我能客观地看待某些事情....
克：但是，你作为观察者，你就是那个试图去观察自身的过去。你只能把自己客观化为一个意象，这个意象是你多年来在各种形式的关系中形成的，所以这个你客观化了的“你”只是记忆和想象，也就是过去。你试图观察自己，就好像你是某个不同的存在体，不同于正在观察着的那个人，但你就是过去，带着它旧有的判断、评估等等。看着过去的记忆的，正是过去的行为。所以永远不会从过去中解脱出来。过去不停地检视着过去，这使过去得以永续；这正是过去的行为，这正是传统的核心。

     Questioner: Then what action is possible? If I am the past - and I can see that I am - then whatever I do to chisel away the past is adding to it. So I am left helpless! What can I do? I can't pray because the invention of a god is again the action of the past. I can't look to another, for the other is also the creation of my despair. I can't run away from it all because at the end of it I am still there with my past. I can't identify myself with some image which is not of the past because that image is my own projection too. Seeing all this, I am really left helpless, and in despair. 

发问者：那么什么样的行为才是可能的？如果我就是过去――我看到自己确实如此――那么无论我做什么去除过去的事情，都只是在加强过去。所以我完全无助了！我能怎么办？我不能祈祷，因为捏造出一个神来又是过去的行为。我不能求助于另一个神，因为那个神也是我绝望的产物。我不能从这一切中逃避，因为逃到最后，我还是和我的过去待在一起。我无法把自己等同于某个不属于过去的意象，因为那意象也是我自己的投射。看到了这一切，我真的无助了，绝望了。

     Krishnamurti: Why do you call it helplessness and despair? Aren't you translating what you see as the past into an emotional anxiety because you cannot achieve a certain result? in so doing you are again making the past act. Now, can you look at all this movement of the past, with all its traditions, without wanting to be free of it, change it, modify it or run away from it - simply observe it without any reaction? 

克：你为什么把它叫做无助和绝望？你难道不是在把你所看到的过去诠释成了一种感情上的焦虑，因为你无法实现某个结果？你这么做，就又是让过去在运作了。现在，你能不能看着过去的这整个运动，及其所有的传统，而不想从中解脱，不想改变它、调整它或者逃避它――只是观察它而没有任何反应？

     Questioner: But as we have been saying all through this conversation, how can I observe the past if I am the past? I can't look at it at all! 
     Krishnamurti: Can you look at yourself, who are the past, without any movement of thought, which is the past? If you can look without thinking, evaluating, liking, disliking, judging, then there is a looking with eyes that are not touched by the past. It is to look in silence, without the noise of thought. In this silence there is neither the observer nor the thing which he is looking at as the past. 

发问者：但是正如我们在这次谈话中一直在说的，如果我就是过去，我要如何观察过去？我根本没法看！
克：你能不能看着自己，也就是过去，而没有任何思想活动，也就是没有过去？如果你能不思考、不评估、无好恶、不评判地看着，那么就有一双没有被过去污染的眼睛在看。那是寂静中的观察，没有思想的噪音。在这寂静中，既没有观察者，也没有他作为过去在观察着的东西。

     Questioner: Are you saying that when you look without evaluation or judgement the past has disappeared? But it hasn't - there are still the thousands of thoughts and actions and all the pettiness which were rampant only a moment ago. I look at them and they are still there. How can you say that the past has disappeared? It may momentarily have stopped acting.... 

发问者：你是不是说，当你不评估、不判断地看时，过去就消失了？但是它没有――片刻之前猖獗着的成千上万的想法和行为，以及所有的琐碎卑微都在还。我看着它们，可它们还在。你怎么能说过去消失了呢？它或许可以暂时地停止运作....

     Krishnamurti: When the mind is silent that silence is a new dimension, and when there is any rampant pettiness it is instantly dissolved, because the mind has now a different quality of energy which is not the energy engendered by the past. This is what matters: to have that energy that dispels the carrying over of the past. The carrying over of the past is a different kind of energy. The silence wipes the other out, the greater absorbs the lesser and remains untouched. It is like the sea, receiving the dirty river and remaining pure. This is what matters. It is only this energy that can wipe away the past. Either there is silence or the noise of the past. In this silence the noise ceases and the new is this silence. It is not that you are made new. This silence is infinite and the past is limited. The conditioning of the past breaks down in the fullness of silence.

克：当头脑安静了，那寂静就是一种新的空间，而当有任何猖獗的卑微琐碎时，那空间立刻就消失了，因为头脑现在拥有了一种不同品质的能量，这能量不是过去产生的。这是真正重要的事情：拥有能驱散过去的重负的能量。过去的重负是另一种能量。寂静清除了这另一种能量，更大的能量吸收了较小的能量，同时保持原样。就像大海，接纳浑浊的河流，同时保持清澈。这是真正重要的事情。只有这种能量能够消除过去。要么有寂静，要么有过去的噪音。在这寂静中，噪音止息了，新生的是这种寂静。不是你被新生了。这寂静是无限的，而过去是有限的。这完满的寂静打破了过去的局限。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'CONDITIONING'
《转变的紧迫性》之“局限”

     Questioner: You have talked a great deal about conditioning and have said that one must be free of this bondage, otherwise one remains imprisoned always. A statement of this kind seems so outrageous and unacceptable! Most of us are very deeply conditioned and we hear this statement and throw up our hands and run away from such extravagant expression, but I have taken you seriously - for, after all, you have more or less given your life to this kind of thing, not as a hobby but with deep seriousness - and therefore I should like to discuss it with you to see how far the human being can uncondition himself. Is it really possible, and if so, what does it mean? Is it possible for me, having lived in a world of habits, traditions and the acceptance of orthodox notions in so many matters - is it possible for me really to throw off this deep-rooted conditioning? What exactly do you mean by conditioning, and what do you mean by freedom from conditioning? 

发问者：关于局限，你讲了很多，你说人必须摆脱这种束缚，否则他就始终身陷囹圄。这种说法似乎太耸人听闻，太让人无法接受了！我们大部分人都深受局限，我们听到这样的主张，会举起双手，逃离这不切实际的说法，但是我对你是认真的――因为，毕竟你或多或少地把自己的生命奉献给了这样的事情，不是把它当作一个嗜好，而是以极其认真的态度――所以我想和你讨论一下这点，来看看人类能在多大程度上解放自己。这是不是真的可能，如果可能，那又意味着什么？我一直生活在习惯、传统中，在如此众多的事情上一直接受公认的观念和看法，这对我来说可能吗――我真的有可能摆脱这根深蒂固的局限吗？你说的局限究竟是什么意思，你说的从局限中解脱是什么意思？

     Krishnamurti: Let us take the first question first. We are conditioned - physically, nervously, mentally - by the climate we live in and the food we eat, by the culture in which we live, by the whole of our social, religious and economic environment, by our experience, by education and by family pressures and influences. All these are the factors which condition us. Our conscious and unconscious responses to all the challenges of our environment - intellectual, emotional, outward and inward - all these are the action of conditioning. Language is conditioning; all thought is the action, the response of conditioning. 

克：让我们先来谈第一个问题。我们是局限的――身体上，精神上，心理上――受限于我们所生活的气候条件和所摄入的食物，受限于我们身处其中的文化，受限于我们整个的社会、宗教和经济环境，受限于我们的经验、教育以及家庭的压力和影响。这一切都是局限我们的因素。我们有意识或者无意识地对我们环境中的所有挑战作出的反应――理智上的，情感上的，外在的和内在的――这一切都局限的行为。语言是局限；所有思想都是局限的活动和反应。

     Knowing that we are conditioned we invent a divine agency which we piously hope will get us out of this mechanical state. We either postulate its existence outside or inside ourselves - as the atman, the soul, the Kingdom of Heaven which is within, and who knows what else! To these beliefs we cling desperately, not seeing that they themselves are part of the conditioning factor which they are supposed to destroy or redeem. So not being able to uncondition ourselves in this world, and not even seeing that conditioning is the problem, we think that freedom is in Heaven, in Moksha, in Nirvana. In the Christian myth of original sin and in the whole eastern doctrine of Samsara, one sees that the factor of conditioning has been felt, though rather obscurely. If it had been clearly seen, naturally these doctrines and myths would not have arisen. Nowadays the psychologists also try to get to grips with this problem, and in doing so condition us still further. Thus the religious specialists have conditioned us, the social order has conditioned us, the family which is part of it has conditioned us. All this is the past which makes up the open as well as the hidden layers of the mind. En passant it is interesting to note that the so-called individual doesn't exist at all, for his mind draws on the common reservoir of conditioning which he shares with everybody else, so the division between the community and the individual is false: there is only conditioning. This conditioning is action in all relationships - to things, people and ideas. 

知道我们是局限的，我们就发明了一个神圣的媒介，虔诚地希望借此能带我们走出这机械的状态。我们假设这神圣要么存在于我们之外，要么在我们之内――内在地作为本我，灵魂，或者天界存在着，天知道还有什么！我们不顾一切地坚守这些信仰，看不到它们本身就是局限因素的一部分，而这些信仰本打算是用来打破或者摆脱这些局限因素的。所以我们无法在这个世界里解放自己，甚至都看不到局限就是问题所在，于是我们以为自由在天堂里，在轮回里，在涅磐里。在基督教关于原罪的神话中，在整个东方的轮回说里，你可以看到，这种局限的因素，已经被感觉到了，尽管这感觉相当的模糊。如果清晰地看到了局限的因素，这些学说和神话故事显然就不会产生了。现在心理学家们也试图把握这个问题，而他们的这种做法，却把我们局限得更深了。所以宗教专家们局限了我们，社会规则局限了我们，作为社会的一部分的家庭也局限了我们。这一切都是过去，构成了我们头脑显露于外和深藏于内的各个层面。顺便提一下很有趣的一件事，即所谓的个人根本不存在，因为他的头脑与其他所有人共享着共同的局限储备并从中汲取着，所以团体和个人之间的分别是虚妄的：其中只有局限。这种局限是所有关系――与事物、人们和观念的关系中的行为。

     Questioner: Then what am I to do to free myself from it all? To live in this mechanical state is not living at all, and yet all action, all will, all judgements are conditioned - so there is apparently nothing I can do about conditioning which isn't conditioned! I am tied hand and foot. 

发问者：那我要做什么才能把自己从中完全解脱出来？生活在这种机械的状态中根本就不是生活，而所有的行为，所有的意愿，所有的评判都是局限的――所以很显然，对于局限我无法做出任何一件不局限的事情。

     Krishnamurti: The very factor of conditioning in the past, in the present and in the future, is the "me" which thinks in terms of time, the "me" which exerts itself; and now it exerts itself in the demand to be free; so the root of all conditioning,is the thought which is the "me". The "me" is the very essence of the past, the "me" is time, the "me" is sorrow - the "me" endeavours to free itself from itself, the "me" makes efforts, struggles to achieve, to deny, to become. This struggle to become is time in which there is confusion and the greed for the more and the better. The "me" seeks security and not finding it transfers the search to heaven; the very "me" that identifies itself with something greater in which it hopes to lose itself - whether that be the nation, the ideal or some god - is the factor of conditioning. 

克：在过去、现在和未来中的局限因素，正是按照时间进行思考的“我”，运用着自身的“我”，而现在它想让自己自由；所以所有局限的根源，是思想，也就是“我”。“我”正是过去的核心，“我”就是时间，“我”就是悲伤――“我”努力想把自己从自己中解脱出来，是“我”在努力，在奋力去实现，去拒绝，去成为。这种想要成为的努力就是时间，其中有困惑，有想要更多和更好的贪婪。“我”寻求安全却找不到，于是把追寻转向天堂；这个“我”把自己与更伟大的某种东西认同在一起，“我”希望如此就能没了自己――不管认同的是国家、理想还是某个神――这个“我”正是局限的因素。

     Questioner: You have taken everything away from me. What am I without this "me"? 
     Krishnamurti: If there is no "me" you are unconditioned, which means you are nothing. 
     Questioner: Can the "me" end without the effort of the "me"? 
     Krishnamurti: The effort to become something is the response, the action, of conditioning. 
     Questioner: How can the action of the "me" stop? 

发问者：你把我的一切都拿走了。没有了这个“我”，那我是什么？
克：如果没有“我”，你就没有了局限，那就意味着你什么都不是。
发问者：没有“我”的努力，这个“我”能结束吗？
克：想要变成什么的努力，是局限的反应和活动。
发问者：“我”的活动怎样才能停止？

     Krishnamurti: It can stop only if you see this whole thing, the whole business of it. If you see it in action, which is in relationship, the seeing is the ending of the "me". Not only is this seeing an action which is not conditioned but also it acts upon conditioning. 
     Questioner: Do you mean to say that the brain - which is the result of vast evolution with its infinite conditioning - can free itself? 

克：只有当你看到了这整件事情，看清了这整个过程，它才能停止。如果你在行为中，也就是在关系中看到了这一点，这看到就是“我”的终结。这看到，不仅仅是一种没有局限的行动，而且它也作用于局限。
发问者：你的意思是不是说，大脑――也就是漫长进化及其无尽局限的产物――能够解放它自己？

     Krishnamurti: The brain is the result of time; it is conditioned to protect itself physically, but when it tries to protect itself psychologically then the "me" begins, and all our misery starts. It is this effort to protect itself psychologically that is the affirmation of the "me". The brain can learn, can acquire knowledge technologically, but when it acquires knowledge psychologically then that knowledge asserts itself in relationship as the "me" with its experiences, its will and its violence. This is what brings division, conflict and sorrow to relationship. 

克：大脑是时间的产物；它因为要在生理上保护自己而受限，但是如果它试图在心理上保护自己，那么“我”就产生了，我们所有的苦难就开始了。是这种想要在心理上保护自己的努力，在强化着“我”。大脑可以学习，能够获得技术上的知识，但是当它获取了心理上的知识，那知识就在关系中把自己确认为“我”，带着它所有的经验、意愿和暴力。这就给关系带来了分裂、冲突和痛苦。

     Questioner: Can this brain be still and only operate when it has to work technologically - only operate when knowledge is demanded in action, as for example in learning a language, driving a car or building a house? 

发问者：这个大脑能够安静下来，只在必须进行技术工作的时候才运作吗――只在行动中需要知识的时候才运作，比如学习一门语言、开车或者盖房子的时候？

     Krishnamurti: The danger in this is the dividing of the brain into the psychological and the technological. This again becomes a contradiction, a conditioning, a theory. The real question is whether the brain, the whole of it, can be still, quiet, and respond efficiently only when it has to in technology or in living. So we are not concerned with the psychological or the technological; we ask only, can this whole mind be completely still and function only when it has to? We say it can and this is the understanding of what meditation is. 

克：这其中的危险是，从心理上的和技术上把大脑一分为二了。这也成为了一种冲突，一种局限，一种理论。真正的问题是，大脑，整个大脑，能不能安静下来，变得寂静，只在技术上或者生活中必须的时候才有效地反应。所以我们关心的不是心理层面，也不是技术层面；我们只是在问，这整个头脑能不能完全安静，只在必要时才运作？我们说这是可能的，而这就是对冥想是什么的了解。

     * * * 
     Questioner: If I may I should like to continue where we left off yesterday. You may remember that I asked two questions: I asked what is conditioning and what is freedom from conditioning, and you said let us take the first question first. We hadn't time to go into the second question, so I should like to ask today, what is the state of the mind that is free from all its conditioning? After talking with you yesterday it became very clear to me how deeply and strongly I am conditioned, and I saw - at least I think I saw - an opening, a crack in this structure of conditioning. I talked the matter over with a friend and in taking certain factual instances of conditioning I saw very clearly how deeply and venomously one's actions are affected by it. As you said at the end, meditation is the emptying of the mind of all conditioning so that there is no distortion or illusion. How s one to be free of all distortion, all illusion? What is illusion? 

发问者：如果可以，我想从昨天我们谈到的地方继续探讨。你可能还记得我问了两个问题：我问局限是什么，从局限中解脱出来是什么，你说让我们先来看第一个问题。我们当时没时间探讨第二个问题，所以今天我想问一下，从所有局限中解脱出来的头脑是怎样的一个状态？昨天和你谈了之后，我清晰地看到自己的局限是多么深重和牢固，我看到――至少我觉得我看到了――这局限的结构中有个缺口，有个裂缝。我和一个朋友谈了这个问题，从一些局限的实际例子中，我非常清楚地看到一个人的行为是如何深受影响和深受其害的。正如你最后所说的，冥想是清空头脑所有的局限，这样就没有了扭曲或者幻觉。一个人要怎样摆脱所有扭曲，所有幻觉？幻觉是什么？

     Krishnamurti: It is so easy to deceive oneself, so easy to convince oneself of anything at all. The feeling that one must be something is the beginning of deception, and, of course, this idealistic attitude leads to various forms of hypocrisy. What makes illusion? Well, one of the factors is this constant comparison between what is and what should be, or what might be, this measurement between the good and the bad - thought trying to improve itself, the memory of pleasure, trying to get more pleasure, and so on. It is this desire for more, this dissatisfaction, which makes one accept or have faith in something, and this must inevitably lead to every form of deception and illusion. It is desire and fear, hope and despair, that project the goal, the conclusion to be experienced. Therefore this experience has no reality. All so-called religious experiences follow this pattern. The very desire for enlightenment must also breed the acceptance of authority, and this is the opposite of enlightenment. Desire, dissatisfaction, fear, pleasure, wanting more, wanting to change, all of which is measurement - this is the way of illusion. 

克：自欺太容易了，让自己相信点什么真是太容易了。一个人有必须成为什么的感觉，是自欺的开始，当然，这种理想主义的态度会导致各种形式的虚伪。是什么制造了幻觉？其中一个因素是不断地比较现在如何和应当如何，或者可能如何，这种好坏之间的衡量――思想试图改善自己，快乐的回忆，想要获得更多的快乐，等等。是这种想要更多的欲望，这种不满，使人接受或者相信某事，而这必然会导致各种形式的自欺和幻觉。是欲望和恐惧，希望和绝望，在投射目标，投射想体验到的结论。所以这种体验没有真实性。所有所谓的宗教体验都遵循这种模式。对觉悟的渴望本身，也必然会滋生对权威的接受，而这是与觉悟背道而驰的。欲望，不满，恐惧，欢愉，想要更多，想要改变，所有这些都是衡量――这就是幻觉的形式。

     Questioner: Do you really have no illusion at all about anything? 
     Krishnamurti: I am not all the time measuring myself or others. This freedom from measurement comes about when you are really living with what is - neither wishing to change it nor judging it in terms of good and bad. Living with something is not the acceptance of it: it is there whether you accept it or not. Living with something is not identifying yourself with it either. 

发问者：你真的对任何事情都完全没有幻觉了吗？
克：我并没有一直在衡量自己或者别人。当你真的与现在如何共处时――既不希望改变也不用好坏来评判，那么就有了从衡量中解脱出来的自由。与某事共处，并不是接受它：不管你接受不接受，它都在那儿。与某事共处，也不是把你自己与它认同在一起。

     Questioner: Can we go back to the question of what this freedom is that one really wants? This desire for freedom expresses itself in everybody, sometimes in the stupidest ways, but I think one can say that in the human heart there is always this deep longing for freedom which is never realized; there is this incessant struggle to be free. I know I am not free; I am caught in so many wants. How am I to be free, and what does it mean to be really honestly free? 

发问者：我们能回到一个人真正想要的这种自由是什么这个问题上来吗？对自由的渴望，表现在每个人身上，有时候以最愚蠢的方式，但是我想可以这么说，在人类的心灵深处一直有这种对自由的强烈渴望，而这自由从未实现过；一直有这种对自由的不停追求。我知道我不自由；我困在如此之多的欲望里。我要怎样才能自由，真正的自由到底意味着什么？

     Krishnamurti: Perhaps this may help us to understand it: total negation is that freedom. To negate everything we consider to be positive, to negate the total social morality, to negate all inward acceptance of authority, to negate everything one has said or concluded about reality, to negate all tradition, all teaching, all knowledge except technological knowledge, to negate all experience, to negate all the drives which stem from remembered or forgotten pleasures, to negate all fulfilment, to negate all commitments to act in a particular way, to negate all ideas, all principles, all theories. Such negation is the most positive action, therefore it is freedom. 

克：或许下面的话能够帮助我们来理解这点：全然的否定就是那自由。否定我们认为正确的所有事情，否定整个社会道德，否定所有内在对权威的接受，否定人们关于真相说过的所有话和所有结论，否定所有传统，所有教诲，所有知识，除了技术知识，否定所有经验，否定所有来自记得不记得的快感的动机，否定所有的成功，否定所有按特定方式行事的承诺，否定所有观念，所有原则，所有理论。这样的否定是最积极的行动，因而就是自由。

     Questioner: If I chisel away at this, bit by bit, I shall go on for ever and that itself will be my bondage. Can it all all wither away in a flash, can I negate the whole human deception, all the values and aspiration and standards, immediately? Is it really possible? Doesn't it require enormous capacity, which I lack, enormous understanding, to see all this in a flash and leave it exposed to the light, to that intelligence you have talked about? I wonder, sir, if you know what this entails. To ask me, an ordinary man with an ordinary education, to plunge into something which seems like an incredible nothingness.... Can I do it? I don't even know what it means to jump into it! It's like asking me to become all of a sudden the most beautiful, innocent, lovely human being. You see I am really frightened now, not the way I was frightened before, I am faced now with something which I know is true, and yet my utter incapacity to do it binds me. I see the beauty of this thing, to be really completely nothing, but.... 

发问者：如果我一点点地清除掉这些，那么我就得永远这么清除下去，这本身就变成了我的制约。这些能一下子都消失掉吗，我能立刻就否定掉整个人类的自欺，所有的价值观、渴望和标准吗？这真的可能吗？这难道不需要巨大的能力，而这正是我缺乏的，需要巨大的领悟，一下子看清这一切，把这一切曝露在阳光下，曝露在你所说的智慧之下？我想知道，先生，你是否知道这都需要些什么。让我，让一个受过普通教育的普通人，纵身跳入某种看起来不可思议的空无之中....我能做到吗？我甚至不知道那纵身一跳意味着什么！就好像你要求我突然变成一个最美，最纯真，最可爱的人一样。你看，我现在真的很害怕，不是像以前那样的害怕，我现在面对着某种我知道是真实的东西，但是我却完全没有能力做到这一点，这种无能为力牢牢捆缚着我。我看到了这件事情的美，成为真正的完全的一无所是者，但是....

     Krishnamurti: You know, it is only when there is emptiness in oneself, not the emptiness of a shallow mind but the emptiness that comes with the total negation of everything one has been and should be and will be - it is only in this emptiness that there is creation; it is only in this emptiness that something new can take place. Fear is the thought of the unknown, so you are really frightened of leaving the known, the attachments, the satisfactions, the pleasurable memories, the continuity and security which give comfort. Thought is comparing this with what it thinks is emptiness. This imagination of emptiness is fear, so fear is thought. To come back to your question - can the mind negate everything it has known, the total content of its own conscious and unconscious self, which is the very essence of yourself? Can you negate yourself completely? If not, there is no freedom. Freedom is not freedom from something - that is only a reaction; freedom comes in total denial. 

克：你知道，只有当一个人内在有这种空寂，不是一个肤浅的头脑的那种空虚，而是来自于对他曾是、应是和将是的一切进行全然否定的空寂――只有在这种空寂中，才有创造；只有在这种空寂中才能有崭新的东西出现。恐惧是对未知的想法，所以你非常害怕离开已知、依赖、满足、快乐的记忆以及带来舒适的连续性和安全感。思想总是拿这些与它认为的空寂进行比较。这种对空寂的想象就是恐惧，所以恐惧是思想。回到你的问题上来――头脑能不能否定它所知的一切，否定它自身意识和潜意识的全部内容，而这个内容正是你自己的核心？你能彻底否定自己吗？如果不能，就没有自由。自由不是从某事中解脱出来――那只是一种反应；自由来自全然的否定。

     Questioner: But what is the good of having such freedom? You are asking me to die, aren't you? 
     Krishnamurti: Of course! I wonder how you are using the word "good" when you say what is the good of this freedom? Good in terms of what? The known? Freedom is the absolute good and its action is the beauty of everyday life. In this freedom alone there is living, and without it how can there be love? Everything exists and has its being in this freedom. It is everywhere and nowhere. It has no frontiers. Can you die now to everything you know and not wait for tomorrow to die? This freedom is eternity and ecstasy and love.

发问者：但是有这样的自由有什么好处？你是在让我死去，不是吗？
克：当然！你说这种自由有什么好处，我不知道你怎么会用“好处”这个词？就什么而言的好处？已知吗？自由是绝对的善，它的行动就是每日生活的美。在这种自由中才有生活，没有自由怎么可能有爱？一切都存在于这自由中，一切在这自由中都有其存身之处。它无处不在又一无所踪。它没有边界。你现在能对你知道的一切死去吗，而不是等到明天再死去？这种自由就是永恒，至乐和爱。
 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'HAPPINESS'
《转变的紧迫性》之“幸福”

     Questioner: What is happiness? I have always tried to find it but somehow it hasn't come my way. I see people enjoying themselves in so many different ways and many of the things they do seem so immature and childish. I suppose they are happy in their own way, but I want a different kind of happiness. I have had rare intimations that it might be possible to get it, but somehow it has always eluded me. I wonder what I can do to feel really completely happy? 

发问者：幸福是什么？我一直想找到它，但是不知怎的它就是不到我身边来。我看到人们用多种不同的方式取悦自己，而他们做的很多事情看起来是那么幼稚和不成熟。我想他们是用自己的方式快乐着，但是我想要的是一种不同的幸福。我曾得到过罕见的暗示说过幸福是可能得到的，但是不知怎的它总是躲避我。我想知道我要怎么做才能真正地感到完全的幸福？

     Krishnamurti: Do you think happiness is an end in itself? Or does it come as a secondary thing in living intelligently? 
     Questioner: I think it is an end in itself because if there is happiness then whatever you do will be harmonious; then you will do things effortlessly, easily, without any friction. I am sure that whatever you do out of this happiness will be right. 

克：你觉得幸福是个最终目标吗？还是在智慧的生活中，它只是随后才发生的事情？
发问者：我觉得它是个最终目标，因为如果有幸福，那么无论你做什么都是和谐的；那么你就会毫不费力地，轻松地做事情，没有任何冲突摩擦。我相信从这种幸福出发，你做的任何事情都是正确的。

     Krishnamurti: But is this so? Is happiness an end in itself? Virtue is not an end in itself. If it is, then it becomes a very small affair. Can you seek happiness? If you do then probably you will find an imitation of it in all sorts of distractions and indulgences. This is pleasure. What is the relationship between pleasure and happiness? 

克：然而是这样的吗？幸福是个最终目标吗？美德不是个最终目标。如果是，那么它就变成了很渺小的一件事。你能追求幸福吗？如果你追求它，那么你可能会发现它的一个赝品，表现为各种各样的消遣和享受。这是快感。快感和幸福之间的关系是什么？

     Questioner. I have never asked myself. 
     Krishnamurti: Pleasure which we pursue is mistakenly called happiness, but can you pursue happiness, as you pursue pleasure? Surely we must be very clear as to whether pleasure is happiness. Pleasure is gratification, satisfaction, indulgence, entertainment, stimulation. Most of us think pleasure is happiness, and the greatest pleasure we consider to be the greatest happiness. And is happiness the opposite of unhappiness? Are you trying to be happy because you are unhappy and dissatisfied? Has happiness got an opposite at all? Has love got an opposite? Is your question about happiness the result of being unhappy? 

发问者：我从未问过自己这个问题。
克：我们追求的快感被误认为是幸福，但是你能像追求快感那样追求幸福吗？显然我们必须非常清楚一点，即快感是不是幸福。快感是满足，满意，享受，娱乐，刺激。我们大部分人都认为快感就是幸福，最大的快感我们认为就是最大的幸福。而幸福是不幸的反面吗？你是不是因为不幸福不满足所以才追求幸福？幸福到底有没有对立面？爱有对立面吗？你关于幸福的问题是不是不幸的结果？

     Questioner: I am unhappy like the rest of the world and naturally I don't want to be, and that is what is driving me to seek happiness. 
     Krishnamurti: So happiness to you is the opposite of unhappiness. If you were happy you wouldn't seek it. So what is important is not happiness but whether unhappiness can end. That is the real problem, isn't it? You are asking about happiness because you are unhappy and you ask this question without finding out whether happiness is the opposite of unhappiness. 

发问者：我像世界上其他的人一样不快乐，当然我不想这样，正是这点驱使我去追求幸福。
克：所以对你来说幸福就是不幸的反面。如果你幸福，你就不会再追求幸福。所以重要的不是幸福，而是不幸能否终结。这才是真正的问题，不是吗？因为你不幸福，你就来问幸福的问题，而你问了这个问题却没发现幸福是不是不幸的反面。

     Questioner: If you put it that way, I accept it. So my concern is how to be free from the misery I am in. 
     Krishnamurti: Which is more important - to understand unhappiness or to pursue happiness? If you pursue happiness it becomes an escape from unhappiness and therefore it will always remain, covered over perhaps, hidden, but always there, festering inside. So what is your question now? 
     Questioner: My question now is why am I miserable? You have very neatly pointed out to me my real state, rather than given me the answer I want, so now I am faced with this question, how am I to get rid of the misery I am in? 

发问者：如果你这么说，我也接受。所以我关心的是，我要怎样摆脱我身处其中的痛苦。
克：哪个更重要――是了解不幸还是追求幸福？如果你追求幸福，那就变成了对不幸的逃避，所以不幸会继续，或许被掩盖，隐藏起来，但是它始终在那儿，在内心溃烂着。那么你现在的问题是什么？
发问者：我现在的问题是我为什么痛苦？你非常确切地指出了我的真实状态，而不是给我一个我想要的答案，所以现在我面对着这个问题，我要如何摆脱我身处的不幸？

     Krishnamurti: Can an outside agency help you to get rid of your own misery, whether that outside agency be God, a master, a drug or a saviour? Or can one have the intelligence to understand the nature of unhappiness and deal with it immediately? 
     Questioner: I have come to you because I thought you might help me, so you could call yourself an outside agency. I want help and I don't care who gives it to me. 

克：一个外部的媒介能够帮你去除你自己的不幸吗，不管这个外部媒介是上帝，上师，药物还是救主？还是一个人得自己拥有了解不幸本质的智慧，并立即将其处理掉？
发问者：我来找你，是因为我想你也许能帮我，所以你把自己称为一个外部媒介。我需要帮助，我不管能帮到我的是谁。

     Krishnamurti: In accepting or giving help several things are involved. If you accept it blindly you will be caught in the trap of one authority or another, which brings with it various other problems, such as obedience and fear. So if you start off wanting help, not only do you not get help - because nobody can help you anyway - but in addition you get a whole series of new problems; you are deeper in the mire than ever before. 

克：接受或给予帮助，这涉及到几件事情。如果你盲目地接受，你就会困在这种或那种权威的陷阱中，而这会带来各种各样其他的问题，比如服从和恐惧。所以如果你从寻求帮助开始，那么你不仅不能得到帮助――因为根本没人能帮你――而且你还会增加整整一系列的新问题；你就比以前陷入了更深的泥沼中。

     Questioner: I think I understand and accept that. I have never thought it out clearly before. How then can I develop the intelligence to deal with unhappiness on my own, and immediately? If I had this intelligence surely I wouldn't be here now, I wouldn't be asking you to help me. So my question now is, can I get this intelligence in order to solve the problem of unhappiness and thereby attain happiness? 

发问者：我想我明白也接受这点。我以前从没想清楚过这点。那么我要怎样才能获得这样的智慧，自己即刻就能处理这不幸？如果我有这种智慧，显然我现在就不会在这里了，我就不会来请你帮我了。所以现在我的问题是，我能获得这种智慧来解决不幸的问题进而获得幸福吗？

     Krishnamurti: You are saying that this intelligence is separate from its action. The action of this intelligence is the seeing and the understanding of the problem,itself. The two are not separate and successive; you don't first get intelligence and then use it on the problem like a tool. it is one of the sicknesses of thinking to say that one should have the capacity first and then use it, the idea or the principle first and then apply it. This itself is the very absence of intelligence and the origin of problems. This is fragmentation. We live this way and so we speak of happiness and unhappiness, hate and love, and so on. 

克：你是说这智慧与它的行动是分开的。这智慧的行动就是看到并理解问题本身。这两者不是分开的，也不是有先后关系的；你无法先获得智慧然后像使用工具一样用它来解决问题。认为一个人必须先拥有能力，然后再使用它，先有想法或者原则然后再应用，这正是思考的弊病之一。这本身正是缺乏智慧，正是问题的根源。这是分裂。我们正是这样生活的，所以我们谈论幸福和不幸，恨和爱，等等等等。

     Questioner: Perhaps this is inherent in the structure of language. 
     Krishnamurti: Perhaps it is but let's not make too much fuss about it here and wander away from the issue. We are saying that intelligence, and the action of that intelligence - which is seeing the problem of unhappiness - are one indivisibly. Also that this is not separate from ending unhappiness or getting happiness. 

发问者：或许语言的内在结构本身就是如此。
克：也许是这样，但是我们在这里不要对此大惊小怪，离开主题。我们说那智慧，以及那智慧的行动――也就是看清不幸的问题――是不可分割的一体。同时这与终结不幸或者得到幸福也不是分开的。

     Questioner: How am I to get that intelligence? 
     Krishnamurti: Have you understood what we have been saying? 
     Questioner: Yes. 

发问者：我要如何获得那智慧？
克：你理解我们刚才说的话了吗？
发问者：是的。

     Krishnamurti: But if you have understood you have seen that this seeing is intelligence. The only thing you can do is to see; you cannot cultivate intelligence in order to see. Seeing is not the cultivation of intelligence. Seeing is more important than intelligence, or happiness, or unhappiness. There is only seeing or not seeing. All the rest - happiness, unhappiness and intelligence - are just words. 
     Questioner: What is it, then, to see? 

发问者：可是如果你理解了，你就会明白这看到就是智慧。你唯一能做的一件事就是去看到；你无法为了看到去培育智慧。看到不是培养智慧。看到比智慧，比幸福或者不幸都重要。只有看到还是没看到。其他的一切――幸福，不幸和智慧――只是词语而已。
发问者：那么，看到是什么呢？

     Krishnamurti: To see means to understand how thought creates the opposites. What thought creates is not real. To see means to understand the nature of thought, memory, conflict, ideas; to see all this as a total process is to understand. This is intelligence; seeing totally is intelligence; seeing fragmentarily is the lack of intelligence. 

克：看到意味着了解思想是如何制造对立面的。思想制造的一切都不是真实的。看到意味着了解思想，记忆，冲突，观念的本质；作为一整个过程看到这一切就是了解。这就是智慧；整体地看到就是智慧；片面地看到就是缺乏智慧。

     Questioner: I am a bit bewildered. I think I understand, but it is rather tenuous; I must go slowly. What you are saying is, see and listen completely. You say this attention is intelligence and you say that it must be immediate. One can only see now. I wonder if I really see now, or am I going home to think over what you have said, hoping to see later? 

发问者：我有点迷惑了。我想我理解了，但是相当牵强；我必须得慢慢来。你说的是，全然地看到和聆听。你说这全神贯注是智慧，你说这必须是即刻发生的。一个人只能现在看到。我不知道我现在是否真的看到了，还是我得回家好好想想你说的话，希望以后能看到？

     Krishnamurti: Then you will never see; in thinking about it you will never see it because thinking prevents seeing. Both of us have understood what it means to see. This seeing is not an essence or an abstraction or an idea. You cannot see if there is nothing to see. Now you have a problem of unhappiness. See it completely, including your wanting to be happy and how thought creates the opposite. See the search for happiness and the seeking help in order to get happiness. See disappointment, hope, fear. All of this must be seen comple- tely, as a whole, not separately. See all this now, give your whole attention to it. 

克：那么你就永远也看不到；如果去思考，你就永远看不到这点，因为思考妨碍了看到。我们都理解了看到意味着什么。这看到不是一种概括，也不是一种抽象、一个观念。如果没什么东西可看，你就无法看到。现在你有个不幸的问题。完全地看到它，包括你想要幸福，以及思想如何制造出了对立面。看到对幸福的追求，看到为了得到幸福去寻求帮助。看到失望，希望和恐惧。这一切必须被作为一个整体完全看到，而不是分开看到。现在来看这一切，用你全部的注意力去看。

     Questioner: I am still bewildered. I don't know whether I have got the essence of it, the whole point. I want to close my eyes and go into myself to see if I have really understood this thing. If I have then I have solved my problem.

发问者：我还是迷惑。我不知道我是否明白了其中的核心，这整个重点。我想闭上眼睛，深入到自己内心来看一看我是不是真的理解了这件事。如果我理解了，那么我就解决了我的问题。 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'LEARNING'
《转变的紧迫性》之“学习”

     Questioner: You have often talked about learning. I don't quite know what you mean by it. We are taught to learn at school and at the University, and life also teaches us many things - to adjust ourselves to environment and to our neighbours, to our wife or husband, to our children. We seem to learn from almost everything, but I am sure that when you speak about learning this isn't quite what you mean because you also seem to deny experience as a teacher. But when you deny experience aren't you denying all learning? After all, through experience, both in technology and in human everyday living, we learn everything we know. So could we go into this question? 

发问者：你常常谈到学习。我不太知道你说的学习是什么意思。我们在学校里、大学里接受教育、学习，生活也教会我们很多东西――根据环境和我们的邻居、妻子或者丈夫、我们的孩子来调整自己。我们似乎在从所有事情中学习，但是我相信你说学习的时候，并不是这个意思，因为你似乎也否定了作为老师的经验。但是当你否定经验时，你不就是在否定一切学习吗？毕竟，通过技术上和人们每日生活中的经验，我们学到了我们所知的一切。所以我们能深入探讨一下这个问题吗？

     Krishnamurti: Learning through experience is one thing - it is the accumulation of conditioning - and learning all the time, not only about objective things but also about oneself, is something quite different. There is the accumulation which brings about conditioning - this we know - and there is the learning which we speak about. This learning is observation - to observe without accumulation, to observe in freedom. This observation is not directed from the past. Let us keep those two things clear. 

克：从经验中学习是一回事――这是局限的积累――而始终在学习，不仅学习客观事物而且也对一个人自己进行了解，这完全是另一回事。存在着导致局限的积累――这点我们都知道――也存在着我们说的那种学习。这种学习是观察――不积累地观察，在自由中观察。这种观察不受过去控制。让我们把这两件事弄清楚。

     What do we learn from experience? We learn things like languages, agriculture, manners, going to the moon, medicine, mathematics. But have we learnt about war through making war? We have learnt to make war more deadly, more efficient, but we haven't learnt not to make war. Our experience in warfare endangers the survival of the human race. Is this learning? You may build a better house, but has experience taught you how to live more nobly inside it? We have learnt through experience that fire burns and that has become our conditioning but we have also learnt through our conditioning that nationalism is good. Yet experience should also teach us that nationalism is deadly. All the evidence is there. The religious experience, as based on our conditioning, has separated man from man. Experience has taught us to have better food, clothes and shelter, but it has not taught us that social injustice prevents the right relationship between man and man. So experience conditions and strengthens our prejudices, our peculiar tendencies and our particular dogmas and beliefs. We do not learn what stupid nonsense all this is; we do not learn to live in the right relationship with other men. This right relationship is love. Experience teaches me to strengthen the family as a unit opposed to society and to other families. This brings about strife and division, which makes it ever more important to strengthen the family protectively, and so the vicious circle continues. We accumulate, and call this "learning through experience", but more and more this learning brings about fragmentation, narrowness and specialization. 

我们从经验里学到了什么？我们学习诸如语言、农业、礼仪、登月、医药、数学之类的东西。但是我们是不是通过发动战争也学会了战争？我们学会了使战争变得更致命、更有效率，但是我们没有学会不去发动战争。我们的战争经验使人类的生存濒临危险。这是学习吗？你能造一座更好的房子，但是这经验教会了你如何更高尚地住在这房子里吗？我们从经验中学到了火会燃烧，这变成了我们的局限，但是我们也从我们的局限里学到了国家主义很好。而经验也应该告诉我们国家主义是致命的。所有的证据都在那儿。以我们的局限为基础的宗教经验，把人与人分割开来。经验教会我们获取更好的食物、衣服和住所，但是它没有教我们认识到社会不公妨碍了人与人之间正确的关系。所以经验决定了加强了我们的偏见，我们特定的倾向和我们特定的教条和信仰。我们没有学到这一切是多么愚蠢的无稽之谈；我们没有学会与他人一起生活在正确的关系中。这正确的关系就是爱。经验告诉我把家庭作为对立于社会和其他家庭的一个单元来巩固。这造成了冲突和分裂，使得保护性地巩固家庭变得更为重要，于是继续恶性循环下去。我们积累，称之为“从经验中学习”，但是这种学习带来了越来越多的分裂、狭隘和限制。

     Questioner: Are you making out a case against technological learning and experience, against science and all accumulated knowledge? If we turn our backs on that we shall go back to savagery. 

发问者：你是在提出论据反对技术上的学习和经验，反对科学和积累的所有知识吗？如果我们反对这些，那么我们就会回到蛮夷状态。

     Krishnamurti: No, I am not making out such a case at all. I think we are misunderstanding each other. We said that there are two kinds of learning: accumulation through experience, and acting from that accumulation, which is the past, and which is absolutely necessary wherever the action of knowledge is necessary. We are not against this; that would be too absurd! 

克：不，我根本不是在反对这些。我想我们误会对方了。我们说有两种学习：一种是通过经验来积累并根据这积累，也就是根据过去进行反应，而需要知识来行动的时候，这些是绝对必要的。我们并不反对这些；那就太荒唐了！

     Questioner: Gandhi tried to keep the machine out of life and started all that business which they call "Home industries" or "Cottage industries" in India. Yet he used modern mechanized transport. This shows the inconsistency and hypocrisy of his position. 

发问者：甘地试图把机器赶出生活，并在印度发起了那场他们称为“居家产业”或者“家庭手工业”的运动。然而他却使用现代机械化的交通工具。这表明了他的主张的矛盾和虚伪。

     Krishnamurti: Let's leave other people out of this. We are saying that there are two kinds of learning - one, acting through the accumulation of knowledge and experience, and the other, learning without accumulation, but learning all the time in the very act of living. The former is absolutely necessary in all technical matters, but relationship, behaviour, are not technical matters, they are living things and you have to learn about them all the time. If you act from what you have learnt about behaviour, then it becomes mechanical and therefore relationship becomes routine. 

克：让我们把其他的人排除讨论之外。我们说有两种学习――一种是，通过积累的知识和经验来行动，另一种是，不积累地学习，始终在生活这个行为本身中学习。前者在所有的技术事务中都是绝对必要的，而关系和行为，不是技术性事务，它们是活生生的事情，你必须始终从中学习。如果你根据之前学到的关于行为的知识来行动，那么就会变得机械化，进而关系就变成了例行公事。

     Then there is another very important point: in all the learning which is accumulation and experience, profit is the criterion that determines the efficiency of the learning. And when the motive of profit operates in human relationships then it destroys those relationships because it brings about isolation and division. When the learning of experience and accumulation enters the domain of human behaviour, the psychological domain, then it must inevitably destroy. Enlightened self-interest on the one hand is advancement, but on the other hand it is the very seat of mischief, misery and confusion. Relationship cannot flower where there is self-interest of any kind, and that is why relationship cannot flower where it is guided by experience or memory. 

接下来还有非常重要的一点：在所有积累和经验的学习中，利益是决定学习效率的标准。当获益的动机在人际关系中运作时，就破坏了这些关系，因为这带来了孤立和分离。当经验和积累的学习进入到人类行为的领域，心理领域中时，就必然会产生破坏。公开的利己主义一方面是进步，但是另一方面正是不幸、痛苦和混乱的根源。如果有任何形式的利己主义，关系就无法绽放，这就是为什么有经验或者记忆指导的地方关系就不能绽放。

     Questioner: I see this, but isn't religious experience something different? I am talking about the experience gathered and passed on in religious matters - the experiences of the saints and gurus, the experience of the philosophers. Isn't this kind of experience beneficial to us in our ignorance? 

发问者：我看到了这点，但是难道宗教体验不是不同的吗？我说的是在宗教事务方面积累和传承下来的经验――圣人和古鲁的经验，哲人的经验。难道这种经验对于对治我们的无知不是有益的吗？

     Krishnamurti: Not at all! The saint must be recognised by society and always conforms to society's notions of sainthood - otherwise he wouldn't be called a saint. Equally the guru must be recognised as such by his followers who are conditioned by tradition. So both the guru and the disciple are part of the cultural and religious conditioning of the particular society in which they live. When they assert that they have come into contact with reality, that they know, then you may be quite sure that what they know is not reality. What they know is their own projection from the past. So the man who says he knows, does not know. in all these so-called religious experiences a cognitive process of recognition is inherent. You can only recognise something you have known before, therefore it is of the past, therefore it is time-binding and not timeless. So-called religious experience does not bring benefit but merely conditions you according to your particular tradition, inclination, tendency and desire, and therefore encourages every form of illusion and isolation. 

克：根本毫无益处！圣人必须为社会所认可，并始终遵守社会对圣徒抱持的信条――否则他就不能被称为圣人。同样古鲁也必须被他的追随者所认可，而这些追随者被传统所局限。所以古鲁和弟子都是他们所处的特定社会的文化和宗教局限的一部分。当他们声称他们接上了真相，声称他们知道，那么你就可以肯定他们知道的不是真相。他们知道的是他们自己来自过去的投射。所以说自己知道的人，并不知道。在所有这些所谓的宗教体验中，必然会有一个认知的过程。你只能认出你以前知道的东西，所以那是来自过去的，因而是受限于时间的，不是永恒的。所谓的宗教体验不会带来任何益处，而是只会把你局限于你特定的传统、倾向、好恶和欲望中，因而助长了各种形式的幻觉和孤立。

     Questioner: Do you mean to say that you cannot experience reality? 
     Krishnamurti: To experience implies that there must be an experiencer and the experiencer is the essence of all conditioning. What he experiences is the already-known. 
     Questioner: What do you mean when you talk about the experiencer? If there is no experiencer do you mean you disappear? 

发问者：你的意思是说你无法体验真相？
克：去体验意味着必须有个体验者，而体验者正是所有局限的核心。他体验到的是已知。
发问者：你说的体验者是什么意思？如果没有体验者，你的意思是不是你消失了？

     Krishnamurti: Of course. The "you" is the past and as long as the "you" remains or the "me" remains, that which is immense cannot be. The "me" with his shallow little mind, experience and knowledge, with his heart burdened with jealousies and anxieties - how can such an entity understand that which has no beginning and no ending, that which is ecstasy? So the beginning of wisdom is to understand yourself. Begin understanding yourself. 
     Questioner: Is the experiencer different from that which he experiences, is the challenge different from the reaction to the challenge? 

克：当然是的。“你”就是过去，只要“你”还在，那无限就不可能在。“我”带着他狭隘的头脑、经验和知识，带着他被嫉妒和焦虑所负累的心――这样一个实体怎么可能了解那无始无终之物，也就是至乐？所以智慧的开端就是了解你自己。开始了解你自己吧。
发问者：体验者与他的体验是不同的吗，挑战与应对挑战的反应是不同的吗？

     Krishnamurti: The experiencer is the experienced, otherwise he could not recognise the experience and would not call it an experience; the experience is already in him before he recognises it. So the past is always operating and recognising itself; the new becomes swallowed up by the old. Similarly it is the reaction which determines the challenge; the challenge is the reaction, the two are not separate; without a reaction there would be no challenge. So the experience of an experiencer, or the reaction to a challenge which comes from the experiencer, are old, for they are determined by the experiencer. If you come to think of it, the word "experience" means to go through something and finish with it and not store it up, but when we talk about experience we actually mean the opposite. Every time you speak of experience you speak of something stored from which action takes place, you speak of something which you have enjoyed and demand to have again, or have disliked and fear to have repeated. 
     So really to live is to learn without the cumulative process.

克：体验者即体验到的，否则他就不可能认出这体验，不会把它称为一次体验；在认出来之前，这体验他已经有过了。所以过去总是在运作并认出它自己；新的东西被旧的吞噬了。同样，是反应决定了挑战；挑战就是反应，这两者不是分开的；没有反应就没有挑战。所以一个体验者的体验，或者体验者对挑战的反应，是陈旧的，因为他们取决于体验者。如果你来想一想，“体验”这个词意味着经历某事，结束它而不存储，但是我们谈起体验的时候，我们实际上说的是相反的意思。每次你说到经验，你说的都是以前存储的东西，而行动从中产生，你说的是你曾经享受过并希望再来一次的事情，或者不喜欢、害怕会再重复的事情。

所以真正地活着就是学习而没有积累的过程。 
 THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'SELF-EXPRESSION'
《转变的紧迫性》之“自我表达”

     Questioner: Expression seems to me so important. I must express myself as an artist otherwise I feel stifled and deeply frustrated. Expression is part of one's existence. As an artist it is as natural that I should give myself to it as that a man should express his love for a woman in words and gestures. But through all this expression there is a sort of pain which I don't quite understand. I think most artists would agree with me that there is deep conflict in expressing one's deepest feelings on canvas, or in any other medium. I wonder if one can ever be free of this pain, or does expression always bring pain? 

发问者：表达对我来说显得特别重要。我必须像一个艺术家那样表达自己，否则我就感觉窒息并且非常沮丧。表达是我存在的一部分。作为一个艺术家，充分表现自己，就像一个男人用语言和动作表达他对一个女人的爱一样自然。但是在这所有的表达过程中，有一种痛苦我不是很理解。我想大多数艺术家都会在这一点上赞同我，即在画布上或者其他介质上表达自己最深刻的感受时，有一种深深的冲突。我想知道一个人能否摆脱这种痛苦，或者是不是表达总是会带来痛苦？

     Krishnamurti: What is the need of expression, and where does the suffering come into all this? Isn't one always trying to express more and more deeply, extravagantly, fully, and is one ever satisfied with what one has expressed? The deep feeling and the expression of it are not the same thing; there is a vast difference between the two, and there is always frustration when the expression doesn't correspond to the strong feeling. Probably this is one of the causes of pain, this discontent with the inadequacy of the utterance which the artist gives to his feeling. In this there is conflict and the conflict is a waste of energy. An artist has a strong feeling which is fairly authentic; he expresses it on canvas. This expression pleases some people and they buy his work; he gets money and reputation. His expression has been noticed and becomes fashionable. He refines it, pursues it, develops it, and is all the time imitating himself. This expression becomes habitual and stylized; the expression becomes more and more important and finally more important than the feeling; the feeling eventually evaporates. The artist is not left with the social consequences of being a successful painter: the market place of the salon and the gallery, the connoisseur, the critics; he is enslaved by the society for which he paints. The feeling has long since disappeared, the expression is an empty shell remaining. Consequently even this expression eventually loses its attraction because it had nothing to express; it is a gesture, a word without a meaning. This is part of the destructive process of society. This is the destruction of the good. 

克：为什么需要表达，所有这一切中的痛苦又是从哪里来的？难道一个人不是总想越来越深刻、恣意、充分地表达自己吗？而对所表达的，他可曾满意过？深刻的感受与对它的表达不是一回事；这两者之间有着巨大的差别，当表达不足以响应这强烈的感受时，就始终会有挫折感。也许这就是痛苦的原因之一，即艺术家对无法充分表达自身感受的这种不满。这其中就有冲突，而冲突是能量的浪费。艺术家拥有某种相当真实的强烈感受；他把这感受用画布表达出来。这种表达取悦了某些人，他们买走他的作品；他得到了金钱和名声。他的表达得到了广泛关注，成为了一种时尚。于是他完善这表达，追逐它，发展它，他始终在模仿自己。这种表达变得习惯和程式化；这表达变得越来越重要，最后变得比感受本身更加重要；最后感受就消失不见了。艺术家所拥有的不只是成为一个成功画家的社会影响：市场上的沙龙和画廊，鉴赏家，批评家；他被他为之作画的社会所奴役。这种感受消失良久，表达就变成了一个残存的空壳。进而最终连这表达也失去了吸引力，因为已经没什么可表达的了；那只是一种没有意义的空洞姿态和语言。这就是这个社会破坏过程的一部分。这就是美好被破坏的过程。

     Questioner: Can't the feeling remain, without getting lost in expression? 

发问者：难道感受就不能保留下来而不迷失在表达中吗？

     Krishnamurti: When expression becomes all-important because it is pleasurable, satisfying or profitable, then there is a cleavage between expression and feeling. When the feeling is the expression then the conflict doesn't arise, and in this there is no contradiction and hence no conflict. But when profit and thought intervene, then this feeling is lost through greed. The passion of feeling is entirely different from the passion of expression, and most people are caught in the passion of expression. So there is always this division between the good and the pleasurable. 

克：当表达因为令人愉悦、满足或者有利可图而变得无比重要时，在表达和感受之间就有了裂隙。当感受就是表达本身时，冲突就不会出现，其中没有矛盾进而没有冲突。但是当利益和思想干涉进来时，就因为贪婪而失去了这种感受。感受里的热情与表达出来的热情完全不同，人们大多数被困在了表达出来的热情里。所以美好与愉悦之间总是有这种分别。

     Questioner: Can I live without being caught in this current of greed? 
     Krishnamurti: If it is the feeling which is important you will never ask about expression. Either you have got the feeling or you haven't. If you ask about the expression, you are not asking about artistry but about profit. Artistry is that which is never taken into account: it is the living. 

发问者：我能不困在这贪婪的洪流里生活吗？
克：如果对你来说重要的是感受，你就永远不会去问表达。你要么有感受，要么没有。如果你来问表达，你问的就不是艺术而是利益。艺术是从来不用思考的事情：它就是生活。

     Questioner: So what is it, to live? What is it to be, and to have that feeling which is complete in itself? I have now understood that expression is beside the point. 
     Krishnamurti: It is living without conflict.

发问者：那么，生活是什么呢？成为并拥有自身就完满的那感受，是怎样的？我现在明白了表达的问题离题了。
克：那就是没有冲突地生活。 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'PASSION'
《转变的紧迫性》之“热情”

     Questioner: What is passion? You've talked about it and apparently you give it a special meaning. I don't think I know that meaning. Like every man I have sexual passion and passions for superficial things like fast driving or cultivating a beautiful garden. Most of us indulge in some form of passionate activity. Talk about his special passion and you see a man's eyes sparkle. We know the word passion comes from the Greek word for suffering, but the feeling I get when you use this word is not one of suffering but rather of some driving quality like that of the wind which comes roaring out of the west, chasing the clouds and the rubbish before it. I'd like to possess that passion. How does one come by it? What is it passionate about? What is the passion you mean? 

发问者：热情是什么？这点你曾谈到过，显然你赋予了它一个特别的含义。我想我不知道那含义是什么。就像所有人一样，我有对性的热情，也有对开快车或者打理漂亮的花园之类肤浅事情的热情。我们多数人都沉溺于某种形式的激情行为中。一个人在谈论他特定的爱好时，你能看到他的眼睛在发光。我们知道热情这个词来自希腊语里的痛苦这个词，但是你用这个词的时候，我感觉到的不是痛苦，而是某种像风一样的驱动力，这风从西方呼啸而来，追赶着它前面的层云和垃圾。我想拥有这热情。一个人要怎样拥有它？它对什么热情洋溢？你说的热情是什么意思？

     Krishnamurti: I think we should be clear that lust and passion are two different things. Lust is sustained by thought, driven by thought, it grows and gathers substance in thought until it explodes - sexually, or, if it is the lust for power, in its own violent forms of fulfilment. Passion is something entirely different; it is not the product of thought nor the remembrance of a past event; it is not driven by any motive of fulfilment; it is not sorrow either. 

克：我想我们应该清楚贪欲和热情是不同的两件事情。贪欲由思想维系，被思想驱使，它在思想中滋长和积聚，直到爆发――从性方面爆发，或者如果那是对权力的贪欲，就会有它自己去实现的暴力方式。热情是截然不同的东西；它不是思想的产物，也不是对过去事件的回忆；它不受任何成功动机的驱使；它也不是悲伤。

     Questioner: Is all sexual passion lust? Sexual response is not always the result of thought; it may be contact as when you suddenly meet somebody whose loveliness overpowers you. 

发问者：所有的性激情都是贪欲吗？性反应不总是思想的产物；当你突然遇到一个可爱得征服了你的人，就可能会发生这样的关系。

     Krishnamurti: Wherever thought builds up the image of pleasure it must inevitably be lust and not the freedom of passion. If pleasure is the main drive then it is lust. When sexual feeling is born out of pleasure it is lust. If it is born out of love it is not lust, even though great delight may then be present. Here we must be clear and find out for ourselves whether love excludes pleasure and enjoyment. When you see a cloud and delight in its vastness and the light on it, there is of course pleasure, but there is a great deal more than pleasure. We are not condemning this at all. If you keep returning to the cloud in thought, or in fact, for a stimulation, then you are indulging in an imaginative flight of fancy, and obviously here pleasure and thought are the incentives operating. When you first looked at that cloud and saw its beauty there was no such incentive of pleasure operating. The beauty in sex is the absence of the "me", the ego, but the thought of sex is the affirmation of this ego, and that is pleasure. This ego is all the time either seeking pleasure or avoiding pain, wanting fulfilment and thereby inviting frustration. In all this the feeling of passion is sustained and pursued by thought, and therefore it is no longer passion but pleasure. The hope, the pursuit, of remembered passion is pleasure. 

克：无论思想在哪里建立起快感的形象，那都必然是贪欲，而不是自由的热情。如果快感是主要驱动力，那么它就是贪欲。如果性感觉诞生于快感，那它就是贪欲。如果是诞生于爱，那就不是贪欲，即使当中可能有巨大的快乐。这点我们必须清楚，必须自己去发现爱是否排除了快感和享受。当你看到一片云，欣赏它的广阔和其上的光芒时，其中确实有一种快乐，但是还有比快乐多得多的东西。我们根本不是在贬低快感。如果你不断地为了得到某种刺激从思想里回想那片云，或者回去看那片云，那么你就是沉溺在异想天开的幻想中，很显然，快感和思想是在这里运作着的诱因。当你初次看到那片云，看到它的美，那时候是没有快感的动机运作的。性中的美是“我”、自我的缺席，但是关于性的想法却在加强这个自我，而这就是快感。这个自我始终在寻求快乐或者避免痛苦，想要成就，因而招致挫败。在这一切中，热情的感觉是被思想维系和追逐的，所以就不再是热情了，而是快感。对记忆中的热情的企望、追求是快感。

     Questioner: What is passion itself, then? 

发问者：那么热情本身是什么呢？

     Krishnamurti: It has to do with joy and ecstasy, which is not pleasure. In pleasure there is always a subtle form of effort - a seeing, striving, demanding, struggling to keep it, to get it, In passion there is no demand and therefore no struggle. In passion there is not the slightest shadow of fulfilment, therefore there can be neither frustration nor pain, Passion is the freedom from the "me", which is the centre of all fulfilment and pain. Passion does not demand because it is, and I am not speaking of something static. Passion is the austerity of self-abnegation in which the "you" and the "me" is not; therefore passion is the essence of life. It is this that moves and lives. But when thought brings in all the problems of having and holding, then passion ceases. Without passion creation is not possible. 

克：它必然与喜悦和至乐同在，而这些不是快感。在快感中总是有一种形式微妙的努力――一个看到、想要、追求、努力保持它、获得它的过程。在热情中，没有欲望，因而没有努力。在热情中，没有一丝的成就感，所以既不会有挫折也不会有痛苦。热情是从“我”中解脱出来，而“我”正是所有满足和痛苦的中心。热情没有欲望，因为它是...我不是在说某种静态的东西。热情是自我否定的简朴，其中没有了“你”和“我”；所以热情是生命的精髓。是这些在运动在生活。但是当思想带来了获得和占有的所有问题时，热情就停止了。没有热情，就不可能有创造。

     Questioner: What do you mean by creation? 
     Krishnamurti: Freedom. 
     Questioner: What freedom? 

发问者：你说的创造是什么意思？
克：自由。
发问者：什么自由？

     Krishnamurti: Freedom from the "me" which depends on environment and is the product of environment - the me which is put together by society and thought. This freedom is clarity, the light that is not lit from the past. Passion is only the present. 

克：从“我”中解脱的自由，“我”依赖于环境，是环境的产物――这个我是由社会和思想造就的。这自由就是清晰，是不从过去点亮的光。热情只有现在。

     Questioner: This has fired me with a strange new feeling. 
     Krishnamurti: That is the passion of learning.

发问者：这用一种奇异的新感觉点燃了我。
克：这就是学习的热情。

     Questioner: What particular action in my daily living will ensure that this passion is burning and operating? 
     Krishnamurti: Nothing will ensure it except the attention of learning, which is action, which is now. In this there is the beauty of passion, which is the total abandonment of the "me" and its time.

发问者：在我的日常生活中，需要怎样的特定行动来确保这种热情持续燃烧和运作？
克：没什么能保证这点，除了全神贯注的学习，也就是行动，也就是现在。其中就有热情的美，也就是对“我”及其时间的彻底抛弃。 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'ORDER'
《转变的紧迫性》之“秩序”

     Questioner: In your teaching there are a thousand details. in my living I must be able to resolve them all into one action, now, which permeates all I do, because in my living I have only the one moment right before me in which to act. What is that one action in daily living which will bring all the details of your teaching to one point, like a pyramid inverted on its point? 
     Krishnamurti: ...dangerously! 

发问者：你的教诲中有千万个细节。我必须在我的生活中现在就能将它们全部融合为一个行动，渗透到我做的所有事情中，因为在我的生活中，我只有就在我眼前的这一刻，在这一刻中去行动。就像金字塔倒置在塔尖上一样，在日常生活中把你教诲的所有细节凝聚成一个点的这个行动是什么？
克：...这太危险了！

     Questioner: Or, to put it differently, what is the one action which will bring the total intelligence of living into focus in one instant in the present? 

发问者：或者换句话说，把生活的全部智慧凝聚到现在这一刻的那个行动是什么？

     Krishnamurti: I think the question to ask is how to live a really intelligent, balanced, active life, in harmonious relationship with other human beings, without confusion, adjustment and misery. What is the one act that will summon this intelligence to operate in whatever you are doing? There is so much misery, poverty and sorrow in the world. What are you, as a human being, to do facing all these human problems? If you use the opportunity to help others for your own fulfilment, then it is exploitation and mischief. So we can put that aside from the beginning. The question really is, how are we to live a highly intelligent, orderly life without any kind of effort? It seems that we always approach this problem from the outside, asking ourselves, "What am I to do, confronted with all the many problems of mankind - economic, social, human?" We want to work this out in terms of the outer. 

克：我想该问的问题是，如何过一种真正智慧、平衡和有活力的生活，与他人处于和谐的关系中，没有困惑、顺从和痛苦。让这种智慧在你所有的行为中都运作的那个行动是什么？世界上有这么多不幸、贫穷和悲伤。作为一个人，面对所有这些人类的问题，你该怎么办？如果你利用帮助别人的机会来实现自己的成就感，那么这就是剥削和伤害。所以我们从一开始就要把这些放在一边。真正的问题是，我们要怎样过一种高度智慧和有序的生活，而没有任何形式的努力？我们似乎总是从外部来着手这个问题，我们问自己，“面对人类这么多的问题，我该怎么办――经济的，社会的，人性的问题？”我们想从外部解决这些问题。

     Questioner: No, I am not asking you how I can tackle or solve the problems of the world, economic, social or political. That would be too absurd! All I want to know is how to live righteously in this world exactly as it is, because it is as it is now, right here before me, and I can't will it into any other shape. I must live now in this world as it is, and in these circumstances solve all the problems of living. I am asking how to make this living a life of Dharma, which is that virtue that is not imposed from without, that does not conform to any precept, is not cultivated by any thought. 

发问者：不，我不是问你我要如何解决或者处理世界上的经济、社会或政治问题。那就太荒唐了！我只是想知道如何在这个世界上按照世界本身的样子正确地生活，因为现在的世界就是这个样子，就在我面前，我不能靠意志力把它变成别的样子。我现在必须如实地生活在这个世界上，就在这样的环境下，解决生活中的所有问题。我问的是怎样把生活变得有德性，这美德不是从无德处强加的，不需遵从任何戒律，也不是由任何思想培养出来的。

     Krishnamurti: Do you mean you want to find yourself immediately, suddenly, in a state of grace which is great intelligence, innocency, love - to find yourself in this state without having a past or a future, and to act from this state? 
     Questioner: Yes! That is it exactly. 
     Krishnamurti: This has nothing to do with achievement, success or failure. There must surely be only one way to live: what is it? 
     Questioner: That is my question. 

克：你的意思是不是，你希望立刻、突然发现自己处于一种善美的状态中，也就是巨大的智慧、赤诚和爱中――发现自己处于这种状态中，没有过去和未来，并从这状态中行动？
发问者：是的！正是这样。
克：这与成就、成功或者失败无关。必然只能有一种生活方式：那是什么方式？
发问者：这就是我的问题。

     Krishnamurti: To have inside you that light that has no beginning and no ending, that is not lit by your desire, that is not yours or someone else's. When there is this inward light, whatever you do will always be right and true. 
     Questioner: How do you get that light, now, without all the struggle, the search, the longing, the questioning? 

克：在你的内心拥有这无始无终的光，那光不是被你的欲望点亮的，不是你的也不是别人的。有了这内在的光，无论你做什么都始终是正确的。
发问者：你要如何得到那光，现在就得到，而不需要任何挣扎、追寻、渴望和质疑？

     Krishnamurti: It is only possible when you really die to the past completely, and this can be done only when there is complete order in the brain. The brain cannot stand disorder. If there is disorder all its activities will be contradictory, confused, miserable and it will bring about mischief in itself and around itself. This order is not the design of thought, the design of obedience to a principle, to authority, or to some form of imagined goodness. It is disorder in the brain that brings about conflict; then all the various resistances cultivated by thought to escape from this disorder arise - religious and otherwise. 

克：只有当你真的对过去彻底死去时，这才可能，只有头脑中有完全的秩序时，才能做到这点。大脑不能容忍任何失序。如果有失序，那么它的所有行为都会是矛盾的，困惑的，痛苦的，会带来自身及其周围的不幸。这秩序不是思想的产物，不是来自对某个原则、权威或者想象出来的某种形式的良善的服从。是头脑中的失序带来了冲突；随后就产生了由思想滋养的所有各式各样的抗拒，以逃避这失序――以宗教的或者非宗教的方式。

     Questioner: How can this order be brought about to a brain that is disorderly, contradictory, in itself? 

发问者：对于一个本身就失序、矛盾的大脑，要怎样带来这种秩序？

     Krishnamurti: It can be done by watchfulness throughout the day, and then, before sleeping, by putting everything that has been done during the day in order. In that way the brain does not go to sleep in disorder. This does not mean that the brain hypnotizes itself into a state of order when there is really disorder in and about it. There must be order during the day, and the summing up of this order before sleeping is the harmonious ending of the day. It is like a man who keeps accounts and balances them properly every evening so that he starts afresh the next day, so that when he goes to sleep his mind is quiet, empty, not worried, confused, anxious or fearful. When he wakes up there is this light which is not the product of thought or of pleasure. This light is intelligence and love. It is the negation of the disorder of the morality in which we have been brought up. 

克：要做到这点，需要整个白天都警觉，然后在睡前，把白天做的所有事情整理有序。这样大脑就不会在失序中睡去。这并不意味着大脑把自己催眠到一个有序的状态里，而实际上在大脑中及其周围都是失序的。白天必须有秩序，到睡前把这秩序归结到一起，一天就和谐地结束了。就像一个人每天晚上合理地保持账户收支平衡，这样第二天他就可以重新开始，所以在入睡的时候，他的头脑是安静的，空无的，而不是着急的，困惑的，焦虑或者恐惧的。当他醒来时，就有一种并非思想或快感产物的光。这光就是智慧和爱。这就否定了我们在其中成长起来的道德上的失序。

     Questioner: Can I have this light immediately? That is the question I asked right at the beginning, only I put it differently. 
     Krishnamurti: You can have it immediately when the "me" is not. The "me" comes to an end when it sees for itself that it must end; the seeing is the light of understanding.

发问者：我能即刻拥有这光吗？这就是我一开始就问的问题，只是提法不同而已。
克：没有了“我”，你就立刻能拥有它。“我”看到自己必须结束，“我”就结束了；这看到就是领悟的光。 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE COMMUNITY'
《转变的紧迫性》之“个人与团体”

     Questioner: I don't quite know how to ask this question but I have a strong feeling that relationship between the individual and the community, these two opposing entities, has been a long history of mischief. The history of the world, of thought, of civilization, is, after all, the history of the relationship between these two opposing entities. In all societies the individual is more or less suppressed; he must conform and fit into the pattern which the theorists have determined. The individual is always trying to break out of these patterns, and continuous battle between the two is the result. Religions talk about the individual soul as something separate from the collective soul. They emphasize the individual. In modern society - which has become so mechanical, standardized and collectively active - the individual is trying to identify himself, enquiring what he is, asserting himself. All struggle leads nowhere. My question is, what is wrong with all this? 

发问者：我不太知道该怎么问你这个问题，但是我有种强烈的感觉，个人和团体这两个对立实体之间的关系，是一部漫长的苦难史。毕竟，世界的、思想的、文化的历史，都是这两个对立实体之间的关系史。在所有社会中，个人都或多或少地被压制；他必须服从并符合理论家们定好的模式。个人总想打破这些模式，结果就是这两者之间的不停斗争。宗教说个人的灵魂是与集体灵魂分开的东西。他们强调个人。在现代社会中――这个社会已经变得如此机械化、标准化，行动划一――个人想要确认和探索他自己是什么，维护自己。所有的斗争都毫无意义。我的问题是，这一切到底出了什么问题？

     Krishnamurti: The only thing that really matters is that there be an action of goodness, love and intelligence in living. Is goodness individual or collective, is love personal or impersonal, is intelligence yours, mine or somebody else's? If it is yours or mine then it is not intelligence, or love, or goodness. If goodness is an affair of the individual or of the collective, according to one's particular preference or decision, then it is no longer goodness. Goodness is not in the backyard of the individual nor in the open field of the collective; goodness flowers only in freedom from both. When there is this goodness, love and intelligence, then action is not in terms of the individual or the collective. Lacking goodness, we divide the world into the individual and the collective, and further divide the collective into innumerable groups according to religion, nationality and class. Having created these divisions we try to bridge them by forming new groups which are again divided from other groups. We see that every great religion supposedly exists to bring about the brotherhood of man and, in actual fact, prevents it. We always try to reform that which is already corrupt. We don't eradicate corruption fundamentally but simply rearrange it. 

克：唯一真正重要的事情是生活中有良善、爱和智慧的行动。善是个人的或者集体的吗，爱是个人的或者非个人的吗，智慧是你的，我的或者别人的吗？如果它是你的或者我的，那么它就不是智慧，爱或者善。如果善是个人的或者集体的事情，基于一个人特定的偏好或者决定，那么它就不再是善。善不在个人的后院里，也不在集体的开阔土地上；善只有在从两者解脱出来的自由中才能绽放。有这种良善、爱和智慧的地方，行动就不再是个人的或者集体的。因为缺乏善，我们把世界划分成了个人的和集体的，并根据宗教、国家和阶级进一步把集体划分为不计其数的组织。制造了这些分别，我们又想通过成立新的组织在其间架起桥梁，而这些组织又是与其他组织相分离的。我们看到所有大型宗教的存在本应带来人类大同，但是事实上，却成为了世界大同的障碍。我们总是试图改革已经腐败的东西。我们不去根除腐败，而只是草草进行一下重组。

     Questioner: Are you saying that we need not waste time in these endless bargainings between the individual and the collective, or try to prove that they are different or that they are similar? Are you saying that only goodness, love and intelligence are the issue, and that these lie beyond the individual or the collective? 
     Krishnamurti: Yes. 

发问者：你是说我们不需要在个人和集体之间这些无止境的讨价还价中浪费时间了，也不要试图去证明他们是不同或者相似的了？你是说只有良善，爱和智慧才是问题所在，而这些问题超越了个人或者集体？
克：是的。

     Questioner: So the real question seems to be how love, goodness and intelligence can act in daily living. 
     Krishnamurti: If these act, then the question of the individual and the collective is academic. 
     Questioner: How are they to act? 

发问者：所以真正的问题似乎是爱、良善和智慧要如何在日常生活中运作。
克：如果它们运作，那么个人和集体的问题就是不切实际的了。
发问者：它们要如何运作？

     Krishnamurti: They can act only in relationship: all existence is in relationship. So the first thing is to become aware of one's relationship to everything and everybody, and to see how in this relationship the "me" is born and acts. This "me" that is both the collective and the individual; it is the "me" that separates; it is the "me" that acts collectively or individually, the "me" that creates heaven and hell. To be aware of this is to understand it. And the understanding of it is the ending of it. The ending of it is goodness, love and intelligence.

克：它们只能在关系中运作：所有存在都在关系中。所以首要的事情就是要觉察到一个人与所有人和事的关系，看到这关系中“我”是如何产生和运作的。这个“我”既是集体的也是个人的；是“我”在分裂；是“我”在集体地或者个体地行动着，这个“我”制造了天堂和地狱。觉察这些就是去了解“我”。而了解了“我”就终结了它。“我”的终结就是良善，爱和智慧。 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'MEDITATION AND ENERGY'
《转变的紧迫性》之“冥想与能量”

     Questioner: This morning I should like to go into the deeper meaning, or deeper sense, of meditation. I have practised many forms of it, including a little Zen. There are various schools which teach awareness but they all seem rather superficial, so can we leave all that aside and go into it more deeply? 

发问者：今天早上我想探讨一下冥想更为深层的含义，或者说更深刻的意义。我练习过很多形式的冥想，包括一点点禅坐。有很多学校教觉察，但是它们看起来都相当肤浅，所以我们能不能把那些都放在一边，更为深入地探讨一下这点？

     Krishnamurti: We must also set aside the whole meaning of authority, because in meditation any form of authority, either one's own or the authority of another, becomes an impediment and prevents freedom - prevents a freshness, a newness. So authority, conformity and imitation must be set aside completely. Otherwise you merely imitate, follow what has been said, and that makes the mind very dull and stupid. In that there is no freedom. Your past experience may guide, direct or establish a new path, and so even that must go. Then only can one go into this very deep and extraordinarily important thing called meditation. Meditation is the essence of energy. 

克：我们必须把权威的整个含义都放在一旁，因为在冥想中，任何形式的权威，无论是一个人自己的还是别人的权威，都会变成一种障碍，妨碍了自由――妨碍新鲜和崭新的东西出现。所以权威、遵从和仿效必须被彻底搁置一旁。否则你就只是在模仿、遵从别人所说的，而那会让头脑变得非常迟钝和愚蠢。那里没有自由。你过去的经验或许能够引导、指出或者建立一种新途径，所以即使是这些东西也必须放下。只有此时你才能深入到被称为冥想的这件非常深刻和极其重要的事情当中去。冥想是能量的核心。

     Questioner: For many years I have tried to see that I do not become a slave to the authority of someone else or to a pattern. Of course there is a danger of deceiving myself but as we go along I shall probably find out. But when you say that meditation is the essence of energy, what do you mean by the words energy and meditation? 

发问者：多年来，我一直努力确保自己不成为别人的权威或者某种模式的奴隶。当然这其中会有一种自欺的危险，但是当我们探讨下去时，我可能就会有所发现。然而当你说冥想是能量的核心时，其中的能量和冥想这些词是什么意思呢？

     Krishnamurti: Every movement of thought every action demands energy. Whatever you do or think needs energy, and this energy can be dissipated through conflict, through various forms of unnecessary thought, emotional pursuits and sentimental activities. Energy is wasted in conflict which arises in duality, in the "me" and the "not-me", in the division between the observer and the observed, the thinker and the thought. When this wastage is no longer taking place there is a quality of energy which can be called an awareness - an awareness in which there is no evaluation, judgement, condemnation or comparison but merely an attentive observation, a seeing of things exactly as they are, both inwardly and outwardly, without the interference of thought, which is the past. 

克：思想的每个运动，每个活动都需要能量。无论你做什么或者想什么，都需要能量，而这种能量可能会因为冲突，因为各种形式的不必要的思想、感情追求和感情用事的行为，而消耗。能量浪费在来自二元性、“我”和“非我”的冲突中，浪费在观察者和被观察者、思想者和思想之间的分裂中。只有这种浪费不再发生时，才能有一种可以被称为觉察的能量品质――在这觉察中没有评估、判断、谴责和比较，只有一种全神贯注的观察，从内在和外在如实地看到事情的样子，没有思想也就是过去的干扰。

     Questioner: This I find very difficult to understand. If there were no thought at all, would it be possible to recognise a tree, or my wife or neighbour? Recognition is necessary, isn't it, when you look at a tree or the woman next door? 

发问者：我发现这点非常难以理解。如果根本没有思想，又怎么可能认出一棵树，或者我的妻子和邻居？当你看着一棵树或者隔壁的女人时，认知是必要的，不是吗？

     Krishnamurti: When you observe a tree is recognition necessary? When you look at that tree, do you say it is a tree or do you just look? If you begin to recognise it as an elm, an oak or a mango tree then the past interferes with direct observation. In the same way, when you look at your wife, if you look with memories of annoyances or pleasures you are not really looking at her but at the image which you have in your mind about her. That prevents direct perception: direct perception does not need recognition. Outward recognition of your wife, your children, your house or your neighbour is, of course necessary, but why should there be an interference of the past in the eyes, the mind and the heart? Doesn't it prevent you from seeing clearly? When you condemn or have an opinion about something, that opinion or prejudice distorts observation. 

克：当你观察一棵树时，认知是必要的吗？当你看着那棵树时，你会说那是棵树，还是只是看着它呢？如果你开始认出那是一颗榆树、橡树或者芒果树，那么过去就是在干扰直接的观察。同样，当你看着你的妻子，如果你是带着苦恼或者快乐的记忆在看，那么你就没有真的在看她，而是在看你头脑里关于她的一个意象。而这妨碍了直接的观察：直接的觉察不需要认知。从外部对你的妻子、孩子、房子或者你的邻居的认知，当然是必要的，但是为什么在你的眼睛里、头脑里和心里要有过去的干涉？难道那没有妨碍你清晰地看到吗？当你对某事谴责或者有某个观点时，那观点或者偏见就扭曲了观察。

     Questioner: Yes, I see that. That subtle form of recognition does distort, I see that. You say all these interferences of thought are a waste of energy. You say observe without any form of recognition, condemnation, judgement; observe without naming, for that naming, recognition, condemnation are a waste of energy. That can be logically and actually understood. Then there is the next point which is the division, the separateness, or, rather, as you have often put it in your talks, the space that exists between the observer and the observed which creates duality; you say that this also is a waste of energy and brings about conflict. I find everything you say logical but I find it extraordinarily difficult to remove that space, to bring about harmony between the observer and the observed. How is this to be done? 

发问者：是的，这点我明白。这种微妙的认知形式确实有扭曲作用，我看到了这点。你说所有这些思想的干扰是能量的浪费。你说观察而没有任何形式的认知、谴责和评判；不命名地观察，因为命名、认知和谴责是能量的浪费。这点可以从道理上被真正地理解。接下来的一个要点是分裂、分离，或者如你在讲话中所说的，存在于观察者和被观察者之间的距离，这产生了二元性；你说这也是一种能量的浪费，带来了冲突。我发现你说的每一件事都很有道理，但是我发现要去除那个距离，带来观察者与被观察者之间的和谐，是极其困难的。要怎样才能做到这点？

     Krishnamurti: There is no how. The how means a system, a method, a practice which becomes mechanical. Again we have to be rid of the significance of the word "how". 
     Questioner: Is it possible? I know the word possible implies a future, an effort, a striving to bring about harmony, but one must use certain words. I hope we can go beyond those words, so is it possible to bring about a union between the observer and the observed? 

克：没有怎样。怎样意味着变得机械的一个体系，一个方法，一种练习。我们还得摒弃“怎样”这个词的含义。
发问者：这可能吗？我知道可能这个词暗示了一个未来，一种想带来和谐的努力和追求，但是你必须得使用某些词语。我希望我们能超越这些词语，那么，是否可能带来观察者和被观察者之间的一种统一？

     Krishnamurti: The observer is always casting its shadow on the thing it observes. So one must understand the structure and the nature of the observer, not how to bring about a union between the two. One must understand the movement of the observer and in that understanding perhaps the observer comes to an end. We must examine what the observer is: it is the past with all its memories, conscious and unconscious, its racial inheritance, its accumulated experience which is called knowledge, its reactions. The observer is really the conditioned entity. He is the one who asserts that he is, and I am. In protecting himself, he resists, dominates, seeking comfort and security. The observer then sets himself apart as something different from that which he observes, inwardly or outwardly. This brings about a duality and from this duality there is conflict, which is the wastage of energy. To be aware of the observer, his movement, his self-centred activity, his assertions, his prejudices, one must be aware of all these unconscious movements which build the separatist feeling that he is different. It must be observed without any form of evaluation, without like and dislike; just observe it in daily life, in its relationships. When this observation is clear, isn't there then a freedom from the observer? 

克：观察者总是在它观察的事物上投射自己的阴影。所以一个人必须了解观察者的结构和性质，而不是去实现这两者之间的统一。一个人必须了解观察者的活动，在这种了解中，也许观察者就终止了。我们必须审视观察者是什么：它是带着所有记忆的过去，有意识的和无意识的，带着过去的种族遗传，被称为知识的积累起来的经验，以及过去的种种反应。观察者实在是一个局限的存在体。他是那个坚称他是谁和我是谁的人。在自我保护中，他抗拒，控制，寻求舒适和安全。继而观察者把自己作为不同于他所观察之物的某种东西分离开来，从内在或外在都是如此。这带来了一种二元性，从这种二元性中就产生了冲突，那正是能量的浪费。要觉察到观察者，他的活动，他的自我中心行为，他的主张，他的偏见，一个人就必须觉察到所有这些潜意识的活动，这些活动制造了一种分离感，感觉自己是不同的。必须没有任何形式的评估，没有好恶地观察到这一点；只是在日常生活中，在关系中观察这些。当这种观察清晰之时，不就有了一种从观察者中解脱出来的自由吗？

     Questioner: You are saying, sir, that the observer is really the ego; you are saying that as long as the ego exists, he must resist, divide, separate, for in this separation, this division, he feels alive. It gives him vitality to resist, to fight, and he has become accustomed to that battle; it is his way of living. Are you not saying that this ego, this "I", must dissolve through an observation in which there is no sense of like or dislike, no opinion or judgement, but only the observing of this "I" in action? But can such a thing really take place? Can I look at myself so completely, so truly, without distortion? You say that when I do look at myself so clearly then the "I" has no movement at all. And you say this is part of meditation? Krishnamurti: Of course. This is meditation. 

发问者：先生，你是说，观察者实际上就是自我；你是说只要自我还存在，他就必然会抗拒，分裂，分离，因为在这种分离和分裂中，他感觉到自己的存在。这给了他抗拒和奋争的力量，他于是变得习惯于这种斗争；那是他的生存方式。你难道不是说这个自我，这个“我”必须要通过没有好恶感的观察来消除吗，没有观点或评判，而只有对这个“我”的行为的观察？但是这种事情真的能发生吗？我能够如此完全地，如此真实地，没有扭曲地看着我自己吗？你说当我如此清晰地看着自己时，“我”就没有任何运动了。你说这是冥想的一部分吗？
克：当然。这就是冥想。

     Questioner: This observation surely demands extraordinary self-discipline. 
     Krishnamurti: What do you mean by self-discipline? Do you mean disciplining the self by putting him in a strait-jacket, or do you mean learning about the self, the self that asserts, that dominates, that is ambitious, violent and so on - learning about it? The learning is, in itself, discipline. The word discipline means to learn and when there is learning, not accumulating, when there is actual learning, which needs attention, that learning brings about its own responsibility, its own activity, its own dimensions: so there is no discipline as something imposed upon it. Where there is learning there is no imitation, no conformity, no authority. If this is what you mean by the word discipline, then surely there is freedom to learn? 

发问者：这种观察肯定需要巨大的自律。
克：你说的自律是什么意思？你的意思是不是把自我装进一件束身衣里来约束他，还是说了解自己，了解那个坚信着，控制着，并且充满了野心和暴力等等的自我――去了解它？了解就是它自己的纪律。纪律这个词意味着学习，当有学习而不是积累，有这种真正的学习时，这需要一种关注，这种学习就带来了它自身的责任，自身的行动，自身的空间：于是就没有那种强加于上的纪律。有学习就没有模仿，没有遵从，没有权威。如果这就是你说的纪律这个词的意思，那么是不是显然就有了学习的自由？

     Questioner: You are taking me too far and perhaps too deeply, and I can't quite go with you where this learning is concerned. I see very clearly that the self as the observer must come to an end. It is logically so, and there must be no conflict: that is very clear. But you are saying that this very observation is learning and in learning there is always accumulation; this accumulation becomes the past. Learning is an additive process, but you are apparently giving it a different meaning altogether. From what I have understood you are saying that learning is a constant movement without accumulation. Is that so? Can learning be without accumulation? 

发问者：你把我带得太远或许也太深了，关于这种学习的那部分，我不太跟得上你。我很清楚地看到，作为观察者的自我必须停止。道理上是这样的，必须没有冲突：这点很清楚。但是你说这种观察本身就是学习，而在学习中总是有积累的；这种积累变成了过去。学习是一个累加的过程，但是显然你赋予了这个词完全不同的含义。按我理解的，你说的学习是一个不停的没有积累的过程。是这样吗？学习能没有积累吗？

     Krishnamurti: Learning is its own action. What generally happens is that having learnt - we act upon what we have learnt. So there is division between the past and action, and hence there is a conflict between what should be and what is, or what has been and what is. We are saying that there can be action in the very movement of learning: that is, learning is doing; it is not a question of having learnt and then acting. This is very important to understand because having learnt, and acting from that accumulation, is the very nature of the "me", the "I", the ego or whatever name one likes to give it. The "I" is the very essence of the past and the past impinges on the present and so on into the future. In this there is constant division. Where there is learning there is a constant movement; there is no accumulation which can become the "I". 

克：学习就是它自身的行动。在学习中通常发生的是――我们根据我们所学到的来行动。所以总是有过去和行动之间的分裂，因而总是有应该如何和现在如何，或者曾经如何和现在如何之间的冲突。我们说在学习的每一刻中都会有行动：也就是说，学习就是行动；不是先学到然后行动的问题。理解这一点，非常重要，因为先学到，然后根据那些积累来行动，正是“我”，“自我”的本质所在，或者不管你喜欢管它叫什么名字。“我”正是过去的核心所在，而过去严重妨碍着现在，进而影响未来。其中不断地有分裂。而有学习的时候，就有一种不停的运动；其中没有会变成“我”的积累过程。

     Questioner: But in the technological field there must be accumulated knowledge. One can't fly the Atlantic or run a car, or even do most of the ordinary daily things without knowledge. 

发问者：但是在技术领域必须有知识的积累。如果没有知识，一个人就不可能飞跃大西洋或者开车，甚至连大部分的日常事务也做不了。

     Krishnamurti: Of course not, sir; such knowledge is absolutely necessary. But we are talking about the psychological field in which the "I" operates. The "I" can use technological knowledge in order to achieve something, a position or prestige; the "I" can use that knowledge to function, but if in functioning the "I" interferes, things begin to go wrong, for the "I", through technical means, seeks status. So the "I" is not concerned merely with knowledge in scientific fields; it is using it to achieve something else. It is like a musician who uses the piano to become famous. What he is concerned with is fame and not the beauty of the music in itself or for itself. We are not saying that we must get rid of technological knowledge; on the contrary, the more technological knowledge there is the better living conditions will be. But the moment the "I" uses it, things begin to go wrong. 

克：当然做不了，先生；这种知识是绝对需要的。但是我们谈的是“我”所活动的心理领域。“我”可以利用技术知识来实现某事，一个职位或者威望；“我”可以使用知识来操作，但是如果在操作中“我”进行干涉，事情的发展就开始误入歧途，因为“我”在通过技术手段，来寻求地位。所以“我”不仅仅关注科学领域的知识；它是在用这些知识来实现别的事情。就像一个音乐家利用钢琴来出名一样。他关心的是名声，而不是音乐本身的美。我们不是说我们必须摆脱技术知识；相反，技术知识越多，生活条件就越好。但是一旦“我”利用了知识，事情就开始误入歧途了。

     Questioner: I think I begin to understand what you are saying. You are giving quite a different meaning and dimension to the word learning, which is marvellous. I am beginning to grasp it. You are saying that meditation is a movement of learning and in that there is freedom to learn about everything, not only about meditation, but about the way one lives, drives, eats, talks, everything. 

发问者：我想我开始理解你所说的了。你赋予了学习这个词完全不同的含义和特性，这很奇妙。我开始领会这一点了。你说冥想是学习的运动，其中就有对所有事情进行学习的自由，不只是学习冥想，而是了解一个人的生活方式，他如何驾驶，进食，说话，所有的事情。

     Krishnamurti: As we said, the essence of energy is meditation. To put it differently - so long as there is a meditator there is no meditation. If he attempts to achieve a state described by others, or some flash of experience.... 

克：正如我们所说，能量的核心是冥想。换句话说――只要有冥想者就没有冥想。如果他试图实现别人描述的某个状态，或者得到某种灵光闪现的体验...

     Questioner: If I may interrupt you, sir, are you saying that learning must be constant, a flow, a line without any break, so that learning and action are one, or a constant movement? I don't know what word to use, but I am sure you understand what I mean. The moment there is a break between learning, action and meditation, that break is a disharmony, that break is conflict. In that break there is the observer and the observed and hence the whole wastage of energy; is that what you are saying? 

发问者：如果我可以打断你一下，先生，你是不是说学习必须是一种不停的流动，没有任何中断的一条线，这样学习和行动就是一体的，或者是同一个不停的运动？我不知道该用什么词，但是我相信你明白我的意思。一旦学习、行动和冥想之间有裂隙，那裂隙就是不和谐，那裂隙就是冲突。那裂隙中有观察者和被观察者，因而就有整个能量的浪费；这是你所说的意思吗？

     Krishnamurti: Yes, that is what we mean. Meditation is not a state; it is a movement, as action is a movement. And as we said just now, when we separate action from learning, then the observer comes between the learning and the action; then he becomes important; then he uses action and learning for ulterior motives. When this is very clearly understood as one harmonious movement of acting, of learning, of meditation, there is no wastage of energy and this is the beauty of meditation. There is only one movement. Learning is far more important than meditation or action. To learn there must be complete freedom, not only consciously but deeply, inwardly - a total freedom. And in freedom there is this movement of learning, acting, meditating as a harmonious whole. The word whole not only means health but holy. So learning is holy, acting is holy, meditation is holy. This is really a sacred thing and the beauty is in itself and not beyond it.

克：是的，这就是我们说的意思。冥想不是一个状态；那是一种运动，就像行动是一种运动。正如我们刚才所说，当我们把行动和学习分开，从学习和行动之间就产生了观察者；然后他就变得很重要；然后他就利用行动和学习来达成别有用心的目的。当非常清晰地理解了作为同一个和谐运动的行动、学习和冥想时，就没有了能量的浪费，而这就是冥想的美。只存在着一种运动。学习比冥想或者行动重要多了。要学习，就必须有完全的自由，不仅仅是意识层面的自由，而且是深深的内在的自由――全然的自由。在自由中就有这种学习、行动和冥想作为一个和谐整体的运动。完整这个词不仅仅意味着健康，而且意味着神圣。所以学习是神圣的，行动是神圣的，冥想是神圣的。这是真正神圣的事情，美就在其中，而不在什么遥远的地方。 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'ENDING THOUGHT'
《转变的紧迫性》之“终结思想”

     Questioner: I wonder what you really mean by ending thought. I talked to a friend about it and he said it is some kind of oriental nonsense. To him thought is the highest form of intelligence and action, the very salt of life, indispensable. It has created civilization, and all relationship is based on it. All of us accept this, from the greatest thinker to the humblest labourer. When we don't think we sleep, vegetate or daydream; we are vacant, dull and unproductive, whereas when we are awake we are thinking, doing, living, quarrelling: these are the only two states we know. You say, be beyond both - beyond thought and vacant inactivity. What do you mean by this? 

发问者：我想知道你说的终结思想究竟是什么意思。我跟一个朋友谈过这点，他说这是东方的某种无稽之谈。对他来说，思想是最高形式的智慧和行为，是生命的精华所在，是不可或缺的。思想创造了文明，所有的关系也基于思想。我们所有人，从最伟大的思想家到最卑微的劳动者，都接受这点。我们不思考的时候会睡去，如同行尸走肉或者做白日梦；我们会茫然，迟钝和没有建设性，而我们醒着的时候，我们思考，做事，生活，争吵：这是我们唯一知道的两个状态。你说，这两者都要超越――超越思想和空洞的不活跃状态。你这么说是什么意思？

     Krishnamurti: Very simply put, thought is the response of memory, the past. The past is an infinity or a second ago. When thought acts it is this past which is acting as memory, as experience, as knowledge, as opportunity. All will is desire based on this past and directed towards pleasure or the avoidance of pain. When thought is functioning it is the past, therefore there is no new living at all; it is the past living in the present, modifying itself and the present. So there is nothing new in life that way, and when something new is to be found there must be the absence of the past, the mind must not be cluttered up with thought, fear, pleasure, and everything else. Only when the mind is uncluttered can the new come into being, and for this reason we say that thought must be still, operating only when it has to - objectively, efficiently. All continuity is thought; when there is continuity there is nothing new. Do you see how important this is? It's really a question of life itself. Either you live in the past, or you live totally differently: that is the whole point. 

克：简单地说，思想是记忆和过去的反应。过去是无限久远或者一秒钟以前。当思想运作时，是这过去在作为记忆，作为经验，作为知识，作为机会在运作。所有的意愿都是基于这过去的欲望，导向快乐或者避免痛苦。当思想在运作，那就是过去，因而根本没有新生活；是过去活在了现在，调整着自己和现在。所以那样生活中就没有新鲜的东西，若要找到新鲜的东西，过去必须缺席，头脑必须不被思想、恐惧、快感及其他东西所充塞。只有当头脑不被充塞的时候，崭新的东西才能出现，因此，我们说思想必须安静，只在必要的时候才运作――客观地，有效地运作。所有的延续性都是思想；有延续性就没有崭新的东西。你看到这点多么重要了吗？这实在是关乎生命本身的一个问题。要么你活在过去里，要么你截然不同地生活：这就是整个重点。

     Questioner: I think I do see what you mean, but how in the world is one to end this thought? When I listen to the blackbird there is thought telling me instantly it is the blackbird; when I walk down the street thought tells me I am walking down the street and tells me all I recognise and see; when I play with the notion of not thinking it is again thought that plays this game. All meaning and understanding and communication are thought. Even when I am not communicating with someone else I am doing so with myself. When I am awake, I think, when I am asleep I think. The whole structure of my being is thought. Its roots lie far deeper than I know. All I think and do and all I am is thought, thought creating pleasure and pain, appetites, longings, resolutions, conclusions, hopes, fears and questions. Thought commits murder and thought forgives. So how can one go beyond it? Isn't it thought again which seeks to go beyond it? 

发问者：我想我确实明白了你的意思，但是在这个世界上一个人要怎样结束这思想？当我听到黑鹂的叫声时，思想马上告诉我这是黑鹂；当我走过街道时，思想告诉我我在走过街道，并且告诉我我认出和看到的一切；当我把玩着不要思考这个想法时，还是思想在玩这个游戏。所有的含义、了解和交流都是思想。即使在我不和别人交流的时候，我也在跟自己交流。醒着的时候我思考，睡着的时候也思考。我整个存在的结构就是思想。它的根源深藏在我所不知道的地方。我所想所做所是的一切都是思想，思想制造了快乐和痛苦、欲望、追求、决定、希望、恐惧和问题。思想谋杀，思想宽恕。那么一个人要怎样才能超越思想？难道不又是思想在寻求超越？

     Krishnamurti: We both said, when thought is still, something new can be. We both saw that point clearly and to understand it clearly is the ending of thought. 
     Questioner: But that understanding is also thought. 
     Krishnamurti: Is it? You assume that it is thought, but is it, actually? 
     Questioner: It is a mental movement with meaning, a communication to oneself. 

克：我们都说了，当思想安静时，新鲜的东西会出现。我们都清楚地看到了这点，而清晰地了解到这点就终结了思想。
发问者：但是这了解也是思想。
克：是吗？你认为那是思想，但它真的是吗？
发问者：那是带有某种含义的一个心理活动，一种跟自己的交流。

     Krishnamurti: If it is a communication to oneself it is thought. But is understanding a mental movement with meaning? 
     Questioner: Yes it is. 

克：如果是跟自己的交流，那就是思想。但是了解是带有某种含义的一个心理活动吗？
发问者：是的。

     Krishnamurti: The meaning of the word and the understanding of that meaning is thought. That is necessary in life. There thought must function efficiently. It is a technological matter. But you are not asking that. You are asking how thought, which is the very movement of life as you know it, can come to an end. Can it only end when you die? That is really your question, isn't it? 
     Questioner: Yes. 

克：词的含义和对那含义的理解是思想。这在生活中是必要的。思想必须在此时有效地运作。这是个技术上的问题。但是你问的不是这个。你问的是思想，也就是你所知的生命中的这种活动本身，能否结束。它只能在你死的时候结束吗？这才是你真正的问题，是不是？
发问者：是的。

     Krishnamurti: That is the right question. Die! Die to the past, to tradition. 
     Questioner: But how? 

克：这才是正确的问题。死去！对过去，对传统死去。
发问者：但是要怎么做到呢？

     Krishnamurti: The brain is the source of thought. The brain is matter and thought is matter. Can the brain - with all its reactions and its immediate responses to every challenge and demand - can that brain be very still? It is not a question of ending thought, but of whether the brain can be completely still. Can it act with full capacity when necessary and otherwise be still? This stillness is not physical death. See what happens when the brain is completely still. See what happens. 

克：大脑是思想的来源。大脑是物质，思想也是物质。大脑能不能――连同它对所有挑战和欲望的反应和即刻的回应――这大脑能不能非常安静？这不是个终结思想的问题，而是大脑能否彻底安静的问题。它能不能在必要的时候才全力以赴地行动，其他时候就保持安静？这寂静不是生理上的死亡。看看大脑完全安静的时候会发生什么。看看会发生什么。

     Questioner: In that space there was a blackbird, the green tree, the blue sky, the man hammering next door, the sound of the wind in the trees and my own heartbeat, the total quietness of the body. That is all. 

发问者：在那空间里，有一只黑鹂，有绿树，有蓝天，有在隔壁敲打着的男人，树间的风声和我自己的心跳声，身体完全的安静。就这些。

     Krishnamurti: If there was recognition of the blackbird singing, then the brain was active, was interpreting. It was not still. This really demands tremendous alertness and discipline, the watching that brings its own discipline, not imposed or brought about by your unconscious desire to achieve a result or a pleasurable new experience. Therefore during the day thought must operate effectively, sanely, and also watch itself. 

克：如果有对歌唱着的黑鹂的认知，那么大脑就在活动着，在诠释。它不是安静的。这真的需要巨大的警觉和纪律，观察带来它自身的纪律，不是思想强加的，也不是你无意中想要实现某个结果或者某个愉悦的新体验的欲望带来的。所以白天思想必须有效地、理性地运作，同时观察自己。

     Questioner: That is easy, but what about going beyond it? 

发问者：这很容易，但是要超越它呢？

     Krishnamurti: Who is asking this question? Is it the desire to experience something new or is it the enquiry? If it is the enquiry, then you must enquire and investigate the whole business of thinking and be completely familiar with it, know all its tricks and subtleties. If you have done this you will know that the question of going beyond thought is an empty one. Going beyond thought is knowing what thought is.

克：谁在问这个问题？是想要体验新东西的欲望，还是探询本身？如果是探询，那么你必须探索和审视思想这整件事情，完全熟悉它，知道它所有的诡计和微妙之处。如果你做到了这点，你就会知道超越思想的问题是没有意义的。超越思想就是知道思想是什么。 
THE URGENCY OF CHANGE - 'THE NEW HUMAN BEING'
《转变的紧迫性》之“新人类”

     Questioner: I am a reformer, a social worker. Seeing the extraordinary injustice there is in the world my whole life has been dedicated to reform. I used to be a Communist but I can't go along with Communism any more, it has ended in tyranny. Nevertheless, I am still dedicated to reforming society so that man can live in dignity, beauty and freedom, and realize the potential which nature seems to have given him, and which he himself seems always to have stolen from his fellow man. In America there is a certain kind of freedom, and yet standardization and propaganda are very strong there - all the mass media exert a tremendous pressure on the mind. It seems that the power of television, this mechanical thing that man has invented, has developed its own personality, its own will, its own momentum; and though probably nobody - perhaps not even any one group - is deliberately using it to influence society, its trend shapes the very souls of our children. And this is the same in varying degrees in all democracies. In China there seems to be no hope at all for the dignity or freedom of man, while in India the government is weak, corrupt and inefficient. It seems to me that all the social injustice in the world absolutely must be changed. I want passionately to do something about it, yet I don't know where to begin to tackle it. 

发问者：我是一个改革者，一个社会工作者。看到世界上有极端的不公，我的整个生命都致力于改革。我曾是一个共产主义者，但是我不再追随共产主义了，它以暴政为终结。然而，我依然投身于社会改革，以期人类能够生活在尊严，美和自由中，实现那自然似乎已经赋予人类的潜能，而人类似乎总是从别人那里窃取这种能力。在美国有某种自由，然而标准化和宣传攻势还是很强大――所有的大众媒体都对头脑产生了巨大的压力。似乎电视的能力，这种人类发明的机械事物已经有了它自己的个性，它自己的意志和动量；尽管也许没什么人，甚至或许没有任何一个组织――有意地利用电视来影响社会，但正是它的倾向塑造了我们孩子的灵魂。而所有民主国家里的情况在不同程度上都是如此。在中国，人的尊严或自由似乎完全无望，而印度的政府非常软弱，腐败和低效。在我看来，世界上所有的社会不公绝对必须得到改变。我满怀热情地想为此做点什么，但是我不知道从哪里开始着手解决。

     Krishnamurti: Reform needs further reform, and this is an endless process. So let us look at it differently. Let us put aside the whole thought of reform; let us wipe it out of our blood. Let us completely forget this idea of wanting to reform the world. Then let us see actually what is happening, right throughout the world. Political parties always have a limited programme which, even if fulfilled, invariably brings about mischief, which then has to be corrected once again. We are always talking about political action as being a most important action, but political action is not the way. Let us put it out of our minds. All social and economic reforms come under this category. Then there is the religious formula of action based on belief, idealism, dogmatism, conformity to some so-called divine recipe. In this is involved authority and acceptance, obedience and the utter denial of freedom. Though religions talk of peace on earth they contribute to the disorder because they are a factor of division. Also the churches have always taken some political stand in times of crisis, so they are really political bodies, and we have seen that all political action is divisive. The churches have never really denied war: on the contrary they have waged war. So when one puts aside the religious recipes, as one puts aside the political formulas - what is left, and what is one to do? Naturally civic order must be maintained: you have to have water in the taps. If you destroy civic order you have to start again from the beginning. So, what is one to do? 

克：改革需要更进一步的改革，而这是一个永无止境的过程。所以让我们换个角度来看这个问题。让我们把整个改革的想法放在一边；让我们把它从我们的血液中清除。让我们彻底忘掉想要改革这个世界的想法。然后让我们来看看整个世界上到底发生着什么。各派政党总是有某个局限的方案，即使得以实施，也不可避免地会带来伤害，而这些又不得不再一次进行纠正。我们总是把政治活动作为最重要的行动来探讨，但是政治活动不是办法。让我们把它抛在脑后。所有社会和经济改革都属于这个范畴。还有基于信仰、理想主义、教条主义以及遵从某些所谓神圣法则的宗教行为模式。这其中包含了权威和接受，服从和对自由的彻底否定。尽管各个宗教都在谈论世界和平，但是它们却助长了失序，因为它们是分裂的因素之一。教会也总在危机来临的时刻采取某种政治立场，所以它们实际上是政治实体，而我们也看到了所有的政治活动都会导致分裂。各个教派从未真正地否定过战争：相反，它们发动战争。所以当一个人把所有的宗教法则扔在一边时，就像他把政治信条扔在一边一样――那么还剩下什么，他又该怎么办？当然市政秩序必须要维持：你的水龙头里得有水。如果你破坏了市政秩序，你就得从头再来一次。那么，他该怎么办？

     Questioner: That is what I am actually asking you. 
     Krishnamurti: Be concerned with radical change, with total revolution. The only revolution is the revolution between man and man, between human beings. That is our only concern. In this revolution there are no blueprints, no ideologies, no conceptual utopias. We must take the fact of the actual relationship between men and change that radically. That is the real thing. And this revolution must be immediate, it must not take time. It is not achieved through evolution, which is time. 

发问者：这正是我在问你的。
克：去关注根本的转变，关注彻底的革命。唯一的革命是人与人之间的，人类之间的革命。这是我们唯一关注的。在这革命中，没有蓝图，没有意识形态，没有概念上的乌托邦。我们必须将人们之间的实际关系这个事实，彻底地加以改变。这才是真正有意义的事情。而这革命必须马上进行，决不能假以时日。这革命不能通过进化，也就是时间来完成。

     Questioner: What do you mean? All historical changes have taken place in time; none of them has been immediate. You are proposing something quite inconceivable. 

发问者：你是什么意思？历史上的所有改变都是花时间发生的；没有什么是立刻发生的。你在倡议某种实在无法想象的事情。

     Krishnamurti: If you take time to change, do you suppose that life is in suspension during the time it takes to change? It isn't in suspension. Everything you are trying to change is being modified and perpetuated by the environment, by life itself. So there is no end to it. It is like trying to clean the water in a tank which is constantly being refilled with dirty water. So time is out. 

克：如果你花时间去改变，那么你认为在改变期间，生活可以暂停吗？生活并没有暂停。你试图改变的一切都在被环境，被生活本身调整着、延续着。所以生活没有停止。这就像试图清洁一个不断装入脏水的罐子里的水一样。所以没有时间了。

     Now, what is to bring about this change? It cannot be will, or determination, or choice, or desire, because all these are part of the entity that has to be changed. So we must ask what actually is possible, without the action of will and assertiveness which is always the action of conflict. 

那么，什么才能带来这改变？意志、决心、选择和欲望都不能带来这改变，因为这一切都是必须被改变的实体的一部分。所以我们必须问一问，不通过意志和决断的行为，这些行为始终是冲突的行为，那么到底什么才是可能的。

     Questioner: Is there any action which is not the action of will and assertiveness? 

发问者：存在着不属于意志和决断的行为吗？

     Krishnamurti: Instead of asking this question let us go much deeper. Let us see that actually it is only the action of will and assertiveness that needs to be changed at all, because the only mischief in relationship is conflict, between individuals or within individuals, and conflict is will and assertiveness. Living without such action does not mean that we live like vegetables. Conflict is our main concern. All the social maladies you mentioned are the projection of this conflict in the heart of each human being. The only possible change is a radical transformation of yourself in all your relationships, not in some vague future, but now. 

克：让我们更深入地探索下去，而不是问出这个问题。让我们看清实际上唯一需要被改变的正是意志和决断的行为，因为关系中唯一的伤害就是个体之间或者个体内在的冲突，而冲突就是意志和决断。生活中没有这样的行为并不意味着我们活得像行尸走肉。冲突是我们主要关注的事情。你提到的所有社会弊病正是每个人内心中这种冲突的投射。唯一可能的改变是在你自己所有的关系中彻底转变自己，不是等到某个模糊的将来，而是现在。

     Questioner: But how can I completely eradicate this conflict in myself, this contradiction, this resistance, this conditioning? I understand what you mean intellectually, but I can only change when I feel it passionately, and I don't feel it passionately. It is merely an idea to me; I don't see it with my heart. If I try to act on this intellectual understanding I am in conflict with another, deeper, part of myself. 

发问者：但是我要怎样彻底根除自己身上的这种冲突、这种矛盾、这种抗拒、这种局限？我从道理上明白你的意思，但是只有在我强烈地感受到这点的时候我才能改变，而我并没有强烈地感受到。对我来说这只是个概念而已；我没有用我的心看到这点。如果我试图根据这智识上的理解来行动，那么我就会与我自己更深层的另一面发生冲突。

     Krishnamurti: If you really see this contradiction passionately, then that very perception is the revolution. If you see in yourself this division between the mind and the heart, actually see it, not conceive of it theoretically, but see it, then the problem comes to an end. A man who is passionate about the world and the necessity for change, must be free from political activity, religious conformity and tradition - which means, free from the weight of time, free from the burden of the past, free from all the action of will: this is the new human being. This only is the social, psychological, and even the political revolution.

克：如果你真的强烈地看到了这冲突，那么这觉察本身就是革命。如果你看到了自己内在头脑和心灵之间的这种分裂，真切地看到这点，不是理论上的设想，而是的确看到了这点，那么这个问题就结束了。一个对世界及改变的迫切性满怀热情的人，必须从政治活动，宗教遵从和传统中解脱出来――这就意味着，从时间的重负下解脱出来，从过去的重负、从意志力的所有行为中解脱出来：这就是新人类。这是唯一的社会、心理乃至政治革命。
